1 Introduction 1
Tools 2
Semantics: Language and Models 3
Knowledge 3
2 Preliminary Basics 5
Sound 5
Simple Sounds 5
Noise 5
Musical Tone 6
Voice Acoustics 7
Interactivity 8
3 The Voice Source 11
!e Origin of Harmonics 12
Voice Source Harmonic Characteristics 13
Mode of Phonation 14
Laryngeal Register 15
Intensity 16
Fundamental Frequency (1fo) 16
Absolute Spectral Tone Color 17
Necessary Roughness 17
Spectral Slope Contribution 18
Take-Away Message for Harmonics 18
Roles of the Glottal Valve 19
PRAA.indb   5PRAA.indb   5 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
 Contents vi
4 Overview of the Changing Theories of 
Vocal Resonance 21
Resonance 21
Coupled Helmholtz Resonators 21
Linear Source-Filter Model 22
Perturbation !eory 23
Non-Linear Source-Filter Model 24
!e Transient !eory of Voice 24
Summary 25
Model Advice 26
5 Resonances and Formants 27
Vocal Tract 27
Resonances and Formants 27
Resonance and Formant Locations 29
Number of Resonances and Formants 30
!e Roles Resonances and Formants Play 30
Vowel Formants 30
Vowel Modi/f_ication 32
!e Roles of the First Formant 32
Depth or Fullness of Timbre 32
Openness-Closeness Dimension of Vowels 33
Harmonic Interactions with the First Resonance 34
!e Roles of the Second Formant 34
Vowel Clarity/De/f_inition 34
Front-Back Designation of Vowels 35
Second Formant Strategies 36
Singer’s Formant Cluster (SFC) 36
Relationship of the SFC to Vocal Fach 37
Relationship of the SFC to Resonance Balance and Interactivity 37
Eﬀect of the Piriform Sinuses 38
Vocal Tract Sound Transfer Characteristics 39
Formants Relative to the Keyboard 39
6 Harmonic:Resonance Interactions 43
Harmonic:First Resonance Interactions 43
Possible Resonance:Harmonic Interactions 44
PRAA.indb   6PRAA.indb   6 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Contents vii
Timbral Opening and Closing 44
Open Timbre 45
Y ell Coupling 45
Y ell Characteristics 46
Close Timbre 47
Whoop Coupling 47
Whoop Characteristics 48
Y ell and Whoop Frequency 49
Turning Over 49
!e Pitch of Turning 50
From Turning to Whoop 51
Resonance Strategies between Turning and Whoop 52
Lowering the First Resonance through Active Vowel 
Modi/f_ication 52
Maintaining Vocal Tract Shape 53
Raising the First Resonance through Vowel Opening 53
Second Formant Strategies Revisited 54
First Resonance Tracking of the First Harmonic ( fR1:1fo ) 55
7 Treble Voice Resonance Strategies 59
Middle Voice Challenge of Open Vowels 60
Upper Middle Voice 61
Whoop Timbre and Beyond 62
Examples of fR1:1fo Tracking 62
8 Lower Passaggio Training 65
Lower Passaggio Objectives 66
A Stable Laryngeal Position and Tube Length, and a 
Convergent Resonator 66
Dynamic Laryngeal Registration 67
Familiarity with Vowel Turning 68
!e Ability to Turn Over 68
Vowel Integrity with Appropriate Vowel Migration 69
Maintenance of Chiaroscuro Timbre 69
Vowel Modi/f_ication Revisited 70
Non-Linear Source-Filter !eory Revisited 72
Resonator Convergence 73
PRAA.indb   7PRAA.indb   7 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
 Contents viii
Vocal Cover/Turning Over 74
Secondary Acoustic Registration Events 75
Handling the Lower Zona di Passaggio 75
Summary of Events Surrounding the Lower Zona di Passaggio 77
Primo Passaggio 77
Secondo Passaggio 78
Registration and Expression/Artistry 78
9 Perceptions of Turning Over 81
Perception of Vowel and Timbre 81
Perception of Tonal Sensation 82
Perception by Voice Type and Vowel 83
Diﬀerence in Eﬀect between Active and Passive Modi/f_ication 84
Perception of Turning in a Deeper Voice 85
Eﬀect of Approach by Leap 85
Darkened Timbre 87
Timbral Openings and Closings Other than fR1:2fo 89
10 Pedagogic Implications of Tube Acoustics 93
General Principles 93
Acoustic Strategies across Range 95
Dynamics 97
11 Strategies That Encourage Tube 
Stability and a Convergent Resonator 99
!e Open !roat 99
Noiseless Inhalation 99
Lowering the Second Formant Frequency 100
Remapping the !roat and Tongue 101
Monitoring Tube Length Stability 101
E#ciency of Articulation 102
Use of Aﬀect to Position and Stabilize the Resonator 103
Tonal “Placement” Sensations 103
Second Formant “Placement” Sensations 104
PRAA.indb   8PRAA.indb   8 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Contents ix
12 The Acoustics of Belting 107
Y ell Characteristics Reviewed 107
Belting: !e Skillful Y ell or Call 108
Muscular Factors in Belting 110
Vocal Fold Factors 110
Mix 110
Vocal Tract Factors 111
Breath Management Factors 112
13 Semantic Di/uniFB00erences 115
Cover Terminology 115
Connecting Terms with Acoustic Strategies 116
Timbral Terminology: Close or Closed 118
Open and Close 119
Laryngeal Register Terminology 119
Vibrational Mechanisms versus Head and Chest 119
Mix and Falsetto 121
Belting and Y elling 122
14 Acoustic Explorations 125
Exploring Vowel Turning 125
Diﬀerences between Treble and Non-Treble Ranges 125
Beginning Explorations 126
Intermediate Explorations and Re/f_inement 129
Exploring the fR1:1fo Transition and Tracking 131
!e Use of Close [o] in Whoop Timbre 135
15 Corollary Strategies 137
Dynamic Control 137
Pressure Reduction 138
Vibrancy and Flow 138
!e Use of Aﬀect 138
!e Problem of Micromanagement 139
PRAA.indb   9PRAA.indb   9 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
 Contents x
16 Laryngeal Registration Revisited 141
Muscle Action 141
Downstream Resistors and Semi-Occluded Vocal Tracts 142
Motivating Laryngeal Stability 143
Laryngeal Registration Goals 143
!e Use of Nasalance 144
17 Instructional Technology 145
!e Madde Voice Synthesizer 145
Limitations of Madde 146
Madde and Modes of Phonation 146
Madde and Non-Linearity 146
Madde and Vibrato 147
Spectrography 147
VoceVista 148
Power Spectra 149
Electroglottography (EGG) 150
Studio Uses of Voce Vista 151
De/f_initions 153
Abbreviations 171
Appendix 1: Madde Explorations 172
Appendix 2: Approximate F1 Locations by Voice 179
Appendix 3: Events Surrounding the Lower Passaggio 181
Appendix 4: Recorded Exercise Examples 182
Appendix 5: YouTube Examples 183
Selected References 185
Index 188
PRAA.indb   10PRAA.indb   10 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Early voice pedagogic advice:
Play skillfully with a shout of joy.
Psalm 33:3 NASB
King David, ca. 1000 BCE
PRAA.indb   11PRAA.indb   11 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Foreword
!e study of human sound has a long history, harking back, I suspect, 
to ancient documents on oratory by Cicero, Seneca, Quintilian, and 
others. !e history of the singing act itself is more compressed, but 
with remarkable achievements over a relatively short period of time. To 
garner some understanding of how far we’ve come in the investigation 
of the human vocal instrument, one may try to imagine the enormous 
excitement surrounding the invention of the laryngoscope, along with 
the /f_irst glimpse of the vocal folds in action, and compare that with 
the rather commonplace status of stroboscope today. Manuel Garcia’s 
invention began an initially timorous, self-conscious courtship of science 
and pedagogy that ultimately merged into a marriage where stormy 
beginnings have—I think it’s safe to say—matured into a healthy, symbiotic 
relationship. !e oﬀspring of that union is a proliferation of research and 
writing about the human voice that has virtually exploded in the last half 
of the twentieth century and into the twenty-/f_irst. We have now attained a 
point of historical perspective at which we can trace a scienti/f_ic/pedagogic 
ancestry that generates a clearer understanding of the present and oﬀers 
direction for the future.
!e book you are holding in your hands is an important contribution 
to the literature, a unique and at the same time necessary expansion of the 
study of voice. A cursory reading of the title may lead one to think of 
acoustics in an external sense, that is, space acoustics and their eﬀect, and 
perhaps studio voice recording. !e subtitle, however, narrows the 
de/f_inition toward an internal orientation, requiring examination of voice 
as an acoustic instrument consisting of power source, sound source, and 
sound modi/f_iers. It diﬀers from typical voice pedagogy texts in that it does 
not oﬀer discrete chapters on breathing, registration, articulation (per se), 
interpretation, and the like; rather, it focuses on the pedagogic implications 
of the voice as an acoustic phenomenon. If much of the material seems 
more directly oriented toward the male singing voice, it is because men 
experience more complex acoustic phenomena than do women. 
PRAA.indb   12PRAA.indb   12 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Foreword xiii
Nonetheless, a great deal of female acoustic strategy is oﬀered as well. 
Additionally, acoustic technology such as VoceVista and the Madde 
Synthesizer is being increasingly used as instructional aids in the voice 
studio, and Bozeman, who, if not a pioneer, is certainly an authoritative 
champion in the application of the latter, oﬀers the reader expert tutorials 
in each.
For a few decades now, I have known Kenneth Bozeman both personally 
and professionally as a highly respected singer, scholar, teacher, and 
author. I have been present at several of his workshops and master classes, 
and it has been my privilege to have published some of his work in the 
Journal of Singing . !at research, along with a great deal of additional 
material, has found elaboration and expanded context in this book, and I 
can think of few more highly quali/f_ied to oﬀer a study of this nature. In a 
subject area where one can soon sink in a sea of unfamiliar terminology, 
technology, and concepts, Bozeman navigates with a lucid, commonsense 
approach. !ere is much information, cogently arranged and clearly 
presented in accessible language, at the same time avoiding pitfalls of 
oversimpli/f_ication. His chapter on formants, for example, is one of the 
most easily understood treatments of the subject of which I’m aware, a 
paradigmatic primer that should be required reading for all singers and 
singing teachers.
To continue the genealogic metaphor introduced above, Bozeman’s 
commitment to distill matters from voice science—especially acoustics—
into practical voice pedagogy illustrates a lineage to the late iconic Richard 
Miller, whose insistence that all voice science regarding the act must 
ultimately serve the art of singing forms the philosophic and pedagogic 
underpinnings of this volume. !is is a very good book, written by an 
expert teacher for teachers.
Richard Dale Sjoerdsma, PhD 
Editor in Chief, Journal of Singing 
Professor Emeritus, Carthage College
Kenosha, Wisconsin 
April, 2013
PRAA.indb   13PRAA.indb   13 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Preface
At the 1981 convention of the National Association of Teachers of Singing 
in Minneapolis, Minnesota, !omas Cleveland presented a paper on the 
relationship of the singer’s formant frequency to voice category. During 
his presentation, a synthesized tenor voice was played singing an F major 
scale on the vowel [a]. Remarkably, the tenor’s vocal quality migrated 
through the color changes associated with the tenor passaggio, though no 
changes in the vocal tract formants or source input had been programmed 
other than the change of pitch (fundamental frequency). !ough passaggio 
was not the focus of the presentation, at that moment I was struck with 
the notion that the timbral shi/f_ts of vocal cover were not due to changes 
in laryngeal register, rather to some resonance phenomenon not yet 
understood. !us began my journey into the area of vocal acoustics.
Eight years later, in a voice lesson with the late Richard Miller during a 
sabbatical at Oberlin, my voice “turned over” while singing an [e] vowel 
on D4 . F r o m  R i c h a r d ’ s  w r i t i n g s ,  I  h a d  p r e v i o u s l y  t h o u g h t  t h a t  t h e  
biological male voice began to prepare for the upper voice during the 
zona di passaggio—roughly D4-G4 for a tenor—but only turned over near 
the secondo passaggio , at G4. I was also surprised at the quality of the 
vowel, which sounded odd to my internal hearing. I asked Richard if what 
I had just done was acceptable. He had me sing the passage again, and 
without further explanation, said that it was /f_ine. !at was the second 
major step in this journey. I was practicing during the sabbatical in the 
new laboratory Richard was developing at Oberlin at the time, and was 
regularly using the Kay Elemetrics Sona-Graph 5500 with its real-time 
spectrography. In very short order, I realized that the voice turned over 
and “closed” in a parallel relationship to the /f_irst formant locations of 
vowels. It would be a few years before I knew precisely what the factors 
were, but from that point on, my teaching of non-treble passaggio was 
changed.
Over the next decade, I tried a few times to interest members of the 
voice science community in testing this hypothesis, but without success. I 
PRAA.indb   14PRAA.indb   14 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Preface xv
didn’t know that at about the same time, Donald Miller and Harm Schutte 
were observing this and other acoustic phenomena in their lab in 
Groningen, Netherlands. It was not until I was provided with Svante 
Granqvist’s Madde voice synthesizer that I could prove with precision 
what I had long suspected: that biological male voices turn over when the 
second harmonic rises above the /f_irst formant of the sung vowel. By this 
time, Miller and Schutte had documented this and related phenomena, 
and in a subsequent visit to Lawrence University, where I teach, Donald 
con/f_irmed my observations. I have since enjoyed very informative 
conversations with Donald and a number of other voice scientists, most 
of whom now acknowledge the phenomenon of the F1:2fo turn of the 
voice.
I am not a voice scientist. I am a voice teacher. It is not my intention 
with this bit of personal history to encourage voice teachers to presume to 
know what we don’t—there’s enough of that already in every profession—
rather to realize that we each bring something of great value to the 
conversation. While voice teachers need to be open to learning from the 
voice science community, and willing to relinquish ideas that run counter 
to reality, we also have vitally important things to contribute. Ongoing 
open and honest collaborations between voice teachers and voice 
scientists—both of whom are thoughtful and humble enough to consider 
perspectives other than their own—are needed to advance the pedagogy 
and art of singing.
Second Edition
!is present edition is an updated, further attempt to distill insights 
and principles emerging from voice research that have proven fruitful 
for studio pedagogy, and to present them in a manner that is accessible 
to the general voice community. It aspires to contribute both to better 
pedagogy and to more productive, better-informed, mutually respectful, 
and bene/f_icial conversations between the pedagogic and scienti/f_ic 
communities.
Changes in this edition include an attempt at more gender-inclusive 
language, an updating of acoustical terms and notation, and the inclusion 
of the transient theory of voice. !ere is some inclusion of Ian Howell’s 
work on spectral tone color and auditory roughness, and Chadley 
PRAA.indb   15PRAA.indb   15 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
 Preface xvi
Ballantyne’s work on vibrotactile sensation, which are elaborated in 
greater detail in Kinesthetic Voice Pedagogy 2 (2021). !ere is also some 
additional content addressing both treble voice acoustics and vocal styles 
other than Western classical.
I am indebted to many souls for what I have learned in the area of 
voice acoustics, from the writings of William Vennard, Johan Sundberg, 
Ingo Titze, and Donald Miller (who also spent a week as a guest in my 
home discussing aspects of the /f_irst edition and advancing my 
understanding, especially of treble voice resonance strategies), to 
enlightening conversations with scientists Ron Scherer and with 
knowledgeable voice colleagues such as Richard Miller, Scott McCoy, 
John Nix, Christian Herbst, Stephen Austin, and Dan Ihasz. More recent 
conversations with Robert Loewen, Nicholas Perna, and Brad Story, and 
my collaborations with Ian Howell and Chadley Ballantyne, have further 
advanced my understanding.
Several colleagues read dra/f_ts of the /f_irst edition and gave helpful 
feedback: Christian Herbst, Donald Miller, John Koopman, Richard 
Sjoerdsma, Stephen Austin, Scott McCoy, Steven Spears, and Dale 
Duesing. A dra/f_t of the second edition was reviewed with feedback by 
Yvonne Gonzales Redmann, Ian Howell, Chadley Ballantyne, Carol 
Mastrodomenico, and Joanne Bozeman.
I owe a special thanks to my good friend, Kathleen Wilson, for urging 
me to write the /f_irst edition, for her subsequent enthusiasm for the project, 
and for insisting that I make it clear and accessible to those less familiar 
with the jargon of voice science.
I thank my students from whom and through whom I have learned 
over the years, especially those who contributed the recorded examples 
and exercises (now available at http://www  .kenbozeman .com or http://
faculty .lawrence .edu /bozemank /664 -2/): Luke Randall, Davey Harrison, 
Willson Oppedahl, Phillip Jindra, Jon Stombres, Mitchell Kasprzyk, Cayla 
Rosche, Paige Koebele, Natasha Foley, Jenna Kuchar, Emily Flack, Tiﬀany 
Hintz, and Antje Boschmann; the young professionals, whose lessons and 
conversations in recent years have inspired further evolution of the 
pedagogic model: Liam McNally, César Castro, and Shaofeng Zheng. I 
also thank my colleague David Berk, Lawrence’s expert in instructional 
technology, who gave generously of his time and expertise in producing 
the early recordings.
PRAA.indb   16PRAA.indb   16 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Preface xvii
Finally, I am grateful to my son Christopher Bozeman for help with 
graphics and illustrations, and to my wife, companion, best friend, and 
fellow voice teacher, Joanne, for countless pedagogic conversations, 
editing help, commonsense counsel, and moral support.
Kenneth W . Bozeman
Emeritus Professor of Music
Lawrence University Conservatory of Music
Appleton, Wisconsin
May 2025
PRAA.indb   17PRAA.indb   17 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
About the Author
Kenneth Bozeman , tenor, Emeritus Professor 
of Music at Lawrence University Conservatory 
of Music in Appleton, Wisconsin (1977–2020), 
holds performance degrees from Baylor 
University and the University of Arizona. He 
subsequently studied at the State Conservatory of 
Music in Munich, Germany, on a fellowship from 
Rotary International. He was chair of the voice 
department at Lawrence, where he taught voice, 
voice science, and pedagogy.
Mr. Bozeman has received both of Lawrence University’s Teaching 
Awards, was awarded the Van Lawrence Fellowship by the Voice 
Foundation and NATS in 1994 for his interest in voice science and 
pedagogy, and is on the editorial boards of the NATS Journal of Singing 
and the Voice Foundation Journal of Voice. He has presented on acoustic 
vocal pedagogy for many venues including the Voice Foundation, 
Physiology and Acoustics of Singing, the Pan European Voice Conference, 
the European, British, and Latvian Voice Teacher Associations, the 
International Congress of Voice Teachers, and NATS conventions. Mr. 
Bozeman was twice a master teacher for the NATS Intern Program (2013 
and 2017), was inducted into the prestigious American Academy of 
Teachers of Singing in 2019, and received a Lifetime Achievement Award 
from the New CCM Vocal Pedagogy Institute in 2024. Mr. Bozeman was 
an active recitalist and performer of oratorio, having performed with the 
Milwaukee Symphony, the Wisconsin Chamber Orchestra, the Green 
Lake Music Festival, and the Louisville Bach Society. His former students 
have sung at major opera houses, including Deutsche Oper Berlin, New 
Y ork City Opera, Santa Fe, Seattle, Houston Grand, San Francisco Opera, 
Chicago Lyric, Malmö Sweden, Dresden, and the Metropolitan Opera.
PRAA.indb   18PRAA.indb   18 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics
1
Introduction
Voice teachers have been addressing vocal acoustics in some manner for as 
long as there has been voice instruction. Given the history of excellence in 
singing, singers, and teachers, the historic empirical approach clearly has 
had success. However, our scienti/f_ic knowledge about and understanding 
of vocal acoustics have grown exponentially in the last sixty to eighty 
years, and will certainly continue to be re/f_ined by the growing number 
of ongoing collaborations between voice scientists and voice teachers 
interested in voice science. With sophisticated yet inexpensive sound 
analysis technology now widely available, more voice teachers are curious 
about its potential value for the studio and the practice room, and seeing 
the need to understand and be well-informed about the acoustics of vocal 
registration—at the very least, as a means to more e#cient pedagogy, but 
also as an essential element of voice pedagogy courses. !ere are several 
excellent texts available that delve deeply into the physics of vocal acoustics 
(See Selected References), and on instructional technology and pedagogic 
application, but there is still a need for texts that explain the pedagogic 
implications of acoustics in a manner accessible to the majority of 
teachers and students. !is book represents an attempt to place principles 
emerging from voice science in a clear and practical pedagogic context for 
voice teachers and voice pedagogy students. An eﬀort has been made to 
distill from the science of vocal acoustics those factors that are essential 
for teachers at the beginning of the twenty-/f_irst century to understand 
and that are most likely to be productive for improving our pedagogic 
e#ciency, and to present them in language that is generally accessible. It 
is the author’s view that while re/f_inement of our scienti/f_ic understanding 
of vocal acoustics will surely continue, the basic elements presented here 
will be immediately helpful and are su#ciently well-established to survive 
PRAA.indb   1PRAA.indb   1 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  2
Introduction
inevitable further developments. !is text will be limited to acoustic 
information that is relevant to teaching and will not address in any detail 
non-acoustic aspects of singing. It is also based primarily on the historic 
aesthetics and practices of the non-ampli/f_ied Western classical singing 
tradition, which necessitates optimal acoustic e#ciency to sustainably 
achieve phonations across a wide range that can /f_ill large venues. Since 
all singers inhabit relatively similar internal acoustic “landscapes, ” many 
of the acoustic principles presented here are relevant for and applicable to 
other vocal styles. !is edition will elaborate further on those connections.
Tools
First a brief word about technology in the studio: !ere is a growing array 
of so/f_tware applications available for studio use. For those who object to 
the amount of voice science and instructional technology invading the 
studio, consider these observations: the teacher who can’t teach a good 
voice lesson without it won’t be able to teach a good voice lesson with 
it. Most technology is merely sophisticated feedback that can give more 
concrete evidence of what good teachers were already listening or looking 
for. !is is no diﬀerent in principle than the use of a mirror, an audio 
recording device, or a video recording device. !e teacher is still just as 
dependent on a re/f_ined ability to hear, sense, and observe what the student 
is doing, but instructional technology can improve the speci/f_icity of 
instruction, the learning curve of students, quickly settle arguments over 
sounds just made, and generally make teaching more e#cient. Of course, 
one can certainly imagine use of the same technology becoming intrusive, 
too prominent, or ine#cient if not well managed, much like an obsession 
with the mirror might be.
Later chapters will explain two excellent instruments of instructional 
technology: the Madde voice synthesizer and the VoceVista Video Pro 
sound analysis program. A number of points in the text will be illustrated 
by suggested explorations using the Madde voice synthesizer (see 
Appendix 1, p. 172). Possible studio uses of VoceVista will be explained 
and illustrated in a subsequent chapter. In order to understand and 
eﬀectively use these instructional tools, the teacher and student will need 
a basic understanding of vocal acoustics. Readers su#ciently informed 
PRAA.indb   2PRAA.indb   2 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
 Introduction 3
about harmonics, resonances, and formants are encouraged to read the 
instructional technology chapters /f_irst and then do each Madde exploration 
as it is suggested in the text. (Seeing and hearing the Madde explorations 
in some cases dramatically and convincingly illustrate the principle being 
discussed.) Others may /f_ind it more productive to return to the Madde 
explorations only a/f_ter /f_irst processing the chapters on harmonics, 
resonances, and formants. Madde is designed for PC computers and 
requires additional so/f_tware for use on Apple computers.
Semantics: Language and Models
All language is metaphorical or representative, not the thing itself. It 
involves assigned and agreed-upon labels for things or concepts. Similarly, 
explanatory models are simpli/f_ied representations of more complex 
phenomena and are used to assist more summary understanding. As 
simpli/f_ications, models deliberately exclude some information in order to 
highlight overarching principles. !erefore, “all models are wrong; some 
are useful” (George Box, statistician). !is principle will obtain in the 
models of acoustics used in this text—being incomplete simpli/f_ications, 
they are heuristic: not absolutely true in all details, but nonetheless useful 
for general understanding and practical application.
Knowledge
Our knowledge base for physical activity is of two kinds: declarative 
knowledge, which describes the objective, physical realities involved; 
and procedural knowledge , which describes the subjective, sensorial 
experiences of and motivations for the phenomena. Objective, declarative 
knowledge involves things that can be measured, documented, and 
subsequently reported with clarity. It is, therefore, accessible to scienti/f_ic 
investigation. However, the objective description of function is of limited 
value as a vocal intention, since motor behavior is best organized by 
simple output targets rather than by complex micromanagement of the 
parts or processes involved. A/f_ter all, all human experience is subjective, 
being mediated through our senses and interpreted by our brain as 
PRAA.indb   3PRAA.indb   3 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  4
percepts. Procedural knowledge, simply put, is what it feels like to do the 
thing—in this case, to sing well. Said another way, procedural knowledge 
is quite plainly ability, skill—the brain guiding the body with stored 
sensorial memories reactivated as intentions of motor behavior. Being 
subjective and sensorial, they are challenging to articulate or describe, yet 
they constitute precisely the kind of knowledge that the singer needs and 
which the teacher must somehow convey. Successful historic pedagogy is 
rife with procedural terminology: terms that are descriptive of functional 
sound and somatosense: head voice, chest voice, pharyngeal voice, whistle 
voice, covering, appoggio, girare, voce aperta, voce chiusa , and so on. 
Our only viable option as teachers, besides demonstration, is to use the 
representative, metaphorical, subjective vehicle of descriptive language 
and models. Vocal directives must be simple enough to execute as motor 
intentions. However, the models and metaphors we choose bene/f_it greatly 
from being informed not only by successful historic pedagogy but also by 
the growing body of increasingly accurate declarative knowledge—that 
is, by science-informed pedagogy. Declarative knowledge can inform 
procedural choices, adding valuable speci/f_icity, but procedural knowledge 
is needed for eﬀective motor intentions, those o/f_ten subconscious, 
sensorial messages from the brain to the body that organize its physiologic 
responses.
PRAA.indb   4PRAA.indb   4 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics Preliminary Basics
2
Preliminary Basics
Sound
Sound to human perception is comprised of pressure variations of some 
su#ciently elastic medium, typically air; variations that are both abrupt 
enough and of enough intensity to fall within the processing capacity 
of the human sense of hearing, that is, from approximately 20 to 20,000 
oscillations per second within su#cient intensity parameters.
Simple Sounds
If an oscillation of air pressure is simple and periodic (sinusoidal and 
regular), it comprises a single frequency. Such simple sounds rarely 
happen in nature but can be generated by a computer. Most sounds are 
complex, containing multiple additive frequency components.
Noise
Aperiodic (non-patterned, irregular) pressure waves are comprised 
of many frequencies that are out of sync with each other. Being 
non-periodic, there is no regularly repeated pattern of variation, no 
common denominator frequency, rather, a theoretically in/f_inite sweep 
of frequency content, and o/f_ten no clear sense of pitch. Like white 
PRAA.indb   5PRAA.indb   5 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  6
light, which is comprised of all light frequencies, a noise containing 
all audible frequencies at approximately equal intensity is termed 
“white noise. ” A white noise input can be shaped su#ciently by a 
resonator to feature a frequency peak and thus impart a sense of pitch. 
For example, the dominant frequency area of noise-based consonants 
helps to determine their identity: this sequence of fricative noises /s ç 
ʃ/ ranges from higher to lower in “pitch” percept (depending upon their 
articulation).
Musical Tone
Musical tones that have a clear pitch percept are sounds whose 
complex waveforms can be understood as being constructed from 
a set of frequencies, all of which are multiples of a lowest common 
denominator, called the fundamental frequency .1 Each of these 
frequency components is called a harmonic . Together they form a 
sound pressure pattern ( pressure waveform ) that repeats itself at 
the frequency of that lowest common denominator. Our perception 
of the frequency of that complex wave—essentially equivalent to its 
fundamental frequency—is called its pitch. Individual frequencies have 
discrete tone colors to human perception—a relative height, brightness, 
and vowel-like tone color (Howell 2016, 2025). !erefore, the relative 
strength of all of the frequency components—the fundamental and the 
higher frequencies or harmonics that comprise the spectral content 
of a particular sound—determines the “color” or “quality” of that 
tone. Our perception of pitch can be aﬀected by the spectral content 
of the sound—stronger high or low-frequency content can slightly 
raise or lower (sharpen or &atten) our sense of the pitch. In a more 
recent attempt at consensus notation among voice science disciplines, 
harmonic frequencies, which were previously reported as H 1, H 2, H 3, 
etc., are now designated as multiples of the fundamental oscillation; 
that is, as 1 fo, 2fo, 3fo, etc. Since musically notated pitch is logarithmic 
in relation to frequency, the musical intervals between successive 
frequencies of the harmonic series decrease in size, starting with an 
octave, a perfect /f_i/f_th, a perfect fourth, a major third, a minor third, 
etc., as shown in Figure 2.1 .
PRAA.indb   6PRAA.indb   6 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
 Preliminary Basics 7
Voice Acoustics
Voice acoustics are modeled in at least two ways: the non-linear source-
/f_ilter model (steady state) which prioritizes the frequency domain, and 
the transient model which prioritizes the time domain. Both models are 
useful to our understanding, yet necessarily incomplete and to that extent 
“incorrect. ” !e currently more o/f_ten encountered source-/f_ilter model may 
imply an independence and chronological sequence of its components 
that misrepresents the immediacy and complexity of their interactions. 
!e more functionally accurate transient model, by de-emphasizing 
harmonics, may distract attention from the simple predictive relevance 
of the intervallic, interactive relationships between potential harmonic 
frequencies and vocal tract resonances to acoustic registration events.
!is text will incorporate aspects of both models, but will primarily 
feature the non-linear source-/f_ilter model, in which voice is described as 
being comprised of two interactive factors: (1) the voice source —the 
complex waveform arising in the vocal tract from the interaction of the 
periodic modulations of the airstream by vocal fold oscillation, and (2)  a 
/f_ilter function, the immediately overlapping eﬀect of the transfer 
function (sound transfer characteristics) of the vocal tract, which 
selectively strengthens or weakens acoustic energy introduced into it by 
the glottal modulation of air&ow. !e term source-/f_ilter is a semantic 
conundrum. Glottal closures, generating the most abrupt changes in 
pressure, are dominant in exciting the vocal tract air column. A single 
glottal pulse closure excites a broadly “shaped” noise response in the vocal 
tract air column. In other words, a spectrum image of a single pulse does 
Figure 2.1  Intervallic relationship of the ﬁrst eight frequencies of the 
harmonic series of the pitch C3.
PRAA.indb   7PRAA.indb   7 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  8
not generate the harmonic set of a sung pitch; rather, it generates a noise 
that maps the resonance structure of the current vocal tract shape. In this 
way, the so-called /f_ilter (the vocal tract) participates in the creation of the 
initial voice source sound, a /f_ilter-shaped noise. Only the periodic 
reiteration of the glottic impulse subsequently /f_ilters that shaped voice 
source noise further for frequencies that oscillate in sync with its 
periodicity, that is, that are whole integer multiples of its fundamental 
iteration frequency. !at periodicity results in a pitch percept. In that way, 
the vocal fold oscillations participate in both source and /f_ilter functions. 
!e intensities of rebounding frequencies that are in sync with subsequent 
glottic closures are reinforced relative to how o/f_ten they are in sync. 1fo is 
in sync every return oscillation and therefore is potentially strongly 
reinforced; 2fo every second return, so somewhat less strongly; 3 fo every 
third return, 4 fo every fourth return, etc., so that increasingly higher 
harmonics weaken in intensity at a decibel rate per octave in what is 
termed a spectral slope, tilt, or roll-oﬀ. Y et, we must bear in mind that 
the intensities of those returning oscillations from each individual glottal 
impulse had already been “shaped” by the transfer function of the vocal 
tract, such that even before “returning, ” some were already stronger—if 
close to a vocal tract resonance peak, and some weaker—if in the “valley” 
between resonances. Hence, we get a subset of strengthened, radiated 
harmonics, so that only those frequencies that are both near vocal tract 
/f_ilter frequency peaks and are also harmonic with the glottic fundamental 
frequency oscillation survive to be represented in the radiated waveform.
Interactivity
!e di#culty in modeling this process in linear time is akin to the age-
old question of which comes /f_irst, the “chicken or the egg. ” !e accurate 
answer is: both. Glottal action excites the inherent reverberation attributes 
of the shape of the air column in the vocal tract. !us, the sound 
source originates in the vocal tract itself. !is interaction is essentially 
simultaneous, not linear nor chronological. !en that single “resonance-
shaped” noise is /f_iltered further by being periodically reiterated by the 
subsequent glottic impulse closures into a subset of harmonic frequencies. 
In sum, the source is also a /f_ilter and the /f_ilter is also a source—a rather 
PRAA.indb   8PRAA.indb   8 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
 Preliminary Basics 9
completely non-linear, looping interactivity. !e eﬀect of the interactions 
between these two factors across range is the primary concern of acoustic 
vocal pedagogy. !ough in function they are overlappingly interactive, 
for simplicity’s sake, the next chapter (“!e Voice Source”) will explore 
aspects of glottal valve function in isolation: especially the way in which 
various closure characteristics of the glottic oscillation contribute to the 
voice source, thus modeling that part of the acoustic raw material from 
which the voice is built up. A later chapter (Resonances and Formants) 
will explore the characteristics, contribution, and tuning of the vocal tract 
as a /f_ilter, followed by a third chapter (Resonance:Harmonic Interactions) 
that examines how these two factors coordinate and interact across range, 
resulting in acoustic registration.
Note
1 !roughout this text, explanations of the terms printed in bold typeface 
can be found in the De/f_initions section starting on page 153.
PRAA.indb   9PRAA.indb   9 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
PRAA.indb   10PRAA.indb   10 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics
3
The Voice Source
!e complex waveform excited in the air column of the vocal tract 
by the oscillation of the vocal folds is called the voice source. In non-
noisy styles of singing, 1 it can be deconstructed as a subset of harmonic 
frequencies of the fundamental frequency of that oscillation. !at set 
of frequencies arises from a combination of the way in which each 
oscillation of the vibrator (the vocal folds) is simultaneously modulated 
from a tracheal airstream into resonance-shaped impulses, which are 
/f_iltered further by the ongoing periodicity of vocal fold oscillations. Only 
those frequencies that initially align with vocal tract resonances and are 
also in sync with the ongoing, reiterated vocal fold periodicity survive. 
Harmonic frequencies can only arise from the fundamental frequency 
of the pitch being sung (assigned by the composer or improvised by the 
performer), with all harmonics being limited to whole integer multiples 
of the fundamental frequency or /f_irst harmonic of that assigned pitch. In 
the typically vibrant tone of Western classical singing, these frequencies 
also oscillate regularly above and below the target frequency set (the 
intended pitch) at a rate of approximately six times per second, creating 
the phenomenon of vocal vibrato. !ere may also be some noise element, 
but the better or “cleaner” the phonation, the higher the harmonic 
to noise ratio —that is, the less aperiodic noise there will be. In an 
excellent tone in the classical aesthetic, there is no perceivable noise; 
in other words, no non-harmonic frequency components of signi/f_icant 
intensity. If such a glottic oscillation could be isolated from the vocal 
tract and introduced into open space—as in a lip brr—a complete set 
of harmonics would occur with a “ roll-oﬀ” or weakening in power the 
higher they are above the /f_irst harmonic (the fundamental frequency) 
at a rate that is aﬀected by several variables, but ideally at about 12 
PRAA.indb   11PRAA.indb   11 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  12
The Voice Source
decibels (dBs) per octave. !e resultant pattern of intensity reduction 
per frequency is called its spectral slope . (Figure 3.1 ) An unresonated, 
pitched “laryngeal buzz” (as might be generated by an excised larynx) is 
surprisingly unattractive (see Madde exploration 1).
Madde Exploration 1: /T_he Unresonated Voice Source
(See Appendix 1, p. 172)
The Origin of Harmonics
A legitimate question arises concerning the physical origin of harmonics 
in voice, a key component of the source-/f_ilter model. Unlike stringed 
instruments, whose string lengths approximately subdivide and oscillate 
at many nearly harmonic frequencies, the glottal opening/closing event 
only oscillates at a fundamental frequency. !is modulates the rate of 
escaping air&ow in such a way as to create pressure variations, converting 
direct current (DC) &ow into an alternating current (AC) form of acoustic 
pressure waves, consisting of air pressure compressions and rarefactions. If 
Figure 3.1 Power spectrum of the voice source with a spectral slope or 
roll-off of ca. 12 dB’s/octave. A power spectrum displays power on the 
vertical and frequency on the horizontal.
PRAA.indb   12PRAA.indb   12 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
 The Voice Source 13
the glottis didn’t actually close, but merely modulated &ow symmetrically, 
that is, sinusoidally, we would only have a single fundamental frequency, 
since such a sinusoidal variation in air&ow would cause sinusoidal air 
pressure variations. With vocal fold closure, however, the &ow, and the rate 
of change of &ow become rather complex and asymmetrical, with a gradual 
increase in &ow at glottal opening, to a brief moment of peak &ow, followed 
by an increasingly steep, abrupt declination of &ow into glottal closure. !at 
sharp declination in &ow, plus the absence of &ow at glottal closure, cause 
a sudden pressure rarefaction, a kind of abrupt “jerking back, ” creating the 
strongest part of the acoustic signal. !is asymmetry, called the maximum 
/f_low declination rate, rapidly accelerates through the theoretical closing 
rates of all higher frequencies, resulting in the excitation of that sweep of 
frequencies that are compatible with the preferential frequency response 
of the vocal tract. As those favored frequencies oscillate back and forth, 
some of them that are in consonant sync with the next glottal closure event 
will be subsequently and repeatedly re-energized, as o/f_ten as their return 
oscillation aligns with the next fundamental glottal closure. !e /f_irst 
harmonic aligns and might receive an appropriately timed strengthening 
rarefaction “pull” on each return. A potential second harmonic would get 
an encouraging pull every second return swing, the third harmonic every 
third return swing, and so on. Being less frequently re-energized per return 
swing results in a weakening of successively higher harmonics, resulting in 
a spectral slope. !e returning swings of frequencies that are not multiples 
of the fundamental arrive at the glottis at an inopportune moment within 
their respective cycles and are suppressed, receiving an eﬀect contrary to 
and at odds with their phase. As mentioned above, impulse frequencies 
were previously enhanced or de-enhanced by the response of vocal tract 
resonances, a topic we will explore in the following chapters.
Voice Source Harmonic 
Characteristics
!e potential number and intensity of harmonics from the voice source 
that are available for resonation are primarily determined by four factors: 
mode of phonation, laryngeal register, intensity, and fundamental 
frequency.
PRAA.indb   13PRAA.indb   13 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  14
Mode of Phonation
!e mode of phonation has to do with the relationship of three factors: 
transglottal air pressure diﬀerence, air&ow, and glottal (valve) resistance. 
Of these, the amount of breath pressure (via torso compression and 
resultant lung volume reduction) and the degree and type of glottal 
adductive resistance are the active, causal, controlling factors, with the 
amount of air&ow being the mediated result. Air &ows from areas of 
higher pressure to areas of lower pressure. Tracheal air pressure (below the 
glottis) is raised to be above the average pressure in the vocal tract (above 
the glottis). !is is referred to as the transglottal pressure diﬀerence . 
!at pressure diﬀerence is casually referred to simply as “breath pressure. ” 
Since transglottal pressure diﬀerence determines the amount of glottal 
resistance necessary to achieve competent vocal fold closure, and since 
the level of glottal resistance determines the collision force of the vibrating 
tissues, having an appropriately low transglottal pressure diﬀerence is 
essential to vocal fold health. A high transglottal pressure diﬀerence and 
collision force, over time, can result in tissue irritation and pathology. 
We will learn that favorable acoustic tunings of the vocal tract can raise 
the eﬀective “back pressure” in the vocal tract to reduce the transglottal 
pressure diﬀerence to comfortable, sustainable levels, even when higher 
subglottic pressure is needed for powerful phonations.
!ese three factors can be modeled in a phonation equation:2 Breath 
pressure/air&ow = glottal resistance. While there are many possible ratios 
between these factors, they can either be in balance, or imbalanced in one 
of two ways: too much air&ow or too much glottal resistance.
 z Pressed phonation (a phonation with excessive glottal resistance 
and insu#cient air&ow) has a moderately strong fundamental 
frequency or /f_irst harmonic (1fo), a shallower (less steep) spectral 
slope with a more gradual roll-oﬀ in power, and thus relatively more 
and stronger high harmonics. It is therefore less warm and more 
metallic, brassy, or overly bright in timbre. Ex.: 1/.5 = 2
 z Breathy phonation (a phonation with excess air&ow and insu#cient 
glottal resistance) has a moderate to strong 1 fo, but a steep spectral 
slope roll-oﬀ in power, and therefore fewer and weaker high partials, 
and o/f_ten some air turbulence noise element. It is therefore airy, 
&uty, and sometimes noisy in timbre. Ex.: 1/2 = .5
PRAA.indb   14PRAA.indb   14 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
 The Voice Source 15
 z Fllow phonation has a strong 1fo, a moderate spectral slope roll-oﬀ  
(about 12 decibels per octave) and a relatively ample number of high 
harmonics. It is therefore balanced in timbre. Ex.: 1/1 = 1
A strong fundamental frequency requires that the amplitude of glottal 
opening be su#cient in each oscillatory cycle. Strong upper partials 
require complete glottal closure with a rapid closing rate, that is, an 
abrupt &ow declination rate. Such a generous opening and abrupt closure 
occurs in balanced &ow phonation, especially if initiated with pleasurable 
expression from gentle but complete glottal closure (a well-executed coup 
de glotte) immediately prior to phonation.
Laryngeal Register
Laryngeal register refers to the muscular adjustment of the vocal folds 
for pitch regulation. !is is primarily controlled by the thyroarytenoids 
(TA), the vocal fold shortening, thickening muscles that make up the 
deeper body of the vocal folds, and the cricothyroids (CT), the vocal 
fold-stretching, thinning muscles that lie partly outside of the larynx. 
!e muscles that close the vocal folds (interarytenoids and lateral 
cricoarytenoids) also play a role. Shorter, thicker, looser folds include 
the TA muscles in the oscillation, vibrate at lower frequencies, and are 
“chestier” in laryngeal register, while longer, tauter, thinner folds shi/f_t  
to vocal ligament  oscillations, vibrate at higher frequencies, and are 
“headier” in laryngeal register. (See Laryngeal Registration Revisited,  
p. 141, for more detail and for training suggestions.)
 z Chestier (shorter, thicker) laryngeal adjustments have a vertical 
phase diﬀerence  (a greater depth of vocal fold contact, with an 
undulatory motion from lower to upper vocal fold margins in 
each cycle) creating a more complex pressure waveform with a 
shallower (less steep) spectral slope, more, stronger high harmonics, 
and greater auditory roughness (buzziness). !ey are therefore 
inherently brassier in timbre. !is thicker vocal fold shape is 
increasingly referred to as vibrational mechanism one (M1).3
 z Headier (longer, thinner) laryngeal adjustments “chop” the airstream 
more simply (little to no vertical phase diﬀerence) and less abruptly, 
creating a more sinusoidal pressure wave pattern with a strong 1 fo, 
but fewer, weaker high harmonics, a steeper spectral slope and 
PRAA.indb   15PRAA.indb   15 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  16
minimal auditory roughness. !ey are therefore smoother, &utier 
in timbre. !is thinner vocal fold shape is referred to as vibrational 
mechanism two (M2).
Intensity4
 z Louder phonations usually have more and stronger high harmonics.
 z Quieter phonations have a steeper roll-oﬀ, with fewer and weaker 
high harmonics.
Fundamental Frequency (1fo)
 z !e approximate equivalent of the pitch percept5
 z A lower 1fo (lower pitch) has both more, and more “closely spaced” 
harmonics within primary audibility range. For example, a baritone 
singing C3, an octave below middle C, will have as many as thirty-
two potential harmonics within the range of the keyboard.
 z A higher 1 fo (higher pitch) has fewer, more “widely spaced” 
harmonics relative to vocal tract resonances. A soprano singing a 
“high C” (C6) will only have four harmonics within the range of the 
keyboard.
 z !e number of harmonics within primary, timbrally signi/f_icant 
audible range (roughly within the keyboard or below ca. 4200 Hz) 
has major implications for vocal resonance, resonance management 
strategy, as well as for vowel de/f_inition, diﬀerentiation, and 
intelligibility (Figure 3.2).
Figure 3.2  Absolute spectral tone color per frequency (adapted from 
Howell with permission).
PRAA.indb   16PRAA.indb   16 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
 The Voice Source 17
Madde Exploration 2: /T_he Eﬀect of Mode of Phonation and Range on 
Potential Voice Source Harmonics
Absolute Spectral Tone Color
Research from the /f_ield of psychoacoustics—how the brain processes 
sound—has recently been brought into voice pedagogy by Ian Howell 
(Howell 2016, 2025). Psychoacoustics observes that, like human eyes 
and brains process light frequencies as colors, our ears and brains 
process sound frequencies as lower or higher, on a darkness to brightness 
continuum, and as vowel-like tone colors. Frequencies below C5 are 
low, dark, and [~u]-like in spectral tone color. Frequencies above C7 are 
high, bright and [~i]-like in spectral tone color. Frequencies between C5 
and C7 are intermediate in brightness and spectral tone color. ( Figure 
3.2) A frequency or su#ciently narrow spectral band from any sound 
source will share an absolute spectral tone color to the same individual 
auditor’s perception. !is understanding is proving to be transformative in 
understanding with predictive speci/f_icity the mechanisms of timbre, vowel 
formation, migration, and modi/f_ication across range and vocal register.
Necessary Roughness
A second observation from the psychoacoustic work of Howell is 
the percept of necessary roughness . As mentioned above, pitch is 
logarithmic, with increasingly smaller intervals between increasingly 
higher harmonics. !e /f_irst /f_ive voice source harmonics are well spaced and 
reinforce a pure, smooth percept of the pitch or fundamental frequency. 
Beginning with harmonic six (6 fo), we have adjacent harmonics that are 
a minor third or less apart. Harmonics in close proximity introduce a 
beating “roughness” to human perception; the closer together, the 
rougher the percept. Harmonics above the eighth harmonic not only 
introduce an even stronger roughness factor but also achieve perceptual 
independence from the fundamental frequency or sense of pitch, existing 
PRAA.indb   17PRAA.indb   17 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  18
as a buzzy or ringing quality alongside the pitch percept. Nota bene:  
psychoacoustic roughness is a buzzing or sizzling quality generated by 
closely clustered, harmonic (periodic) frequencies, and is not the same 
as aperiodic roughness caused by asymmetrical vocal fold vibration, 
false vocal fold vibration, the deliberate distortion used in some vocal 
genres, or noises induced by vocal fold pathology. Competent vocal fold 
closure results in a longer closed phase in each vibratory cycle, generating 
higher, more closely clustered harmonics and an increase in roughness 
percept. All of the factors cited above that aﬀect the number and strength 
of harmonics—mode of phonation, laryngeal register, intensity, and 
fundamental frequency—also aﬀect the amount and quality of timbral 
roughness. Auditory roughness is a “necessary” correlate to competent 
vocal fold closure for much of the range. Being perceptually associated 
with laryngeal registers—buzzier seeming “chestier” and smoother 
seeming “headier”—auditory roughness migrates across range, register, 
and voice type from buzzier low tones to smoother high tones.
Spectral Slope Contribution
!e main contribution of the glottal valve to the perception of timbre is 
via spectral slope, since spectral slope determines both relative brightness 
and auditory roughness. It also contributes to the strength of the more 
o/f_ten, vowel-identifying second formant contribution. A steep spectral 
slope will seem warmer, rounder, smoother, and therefore “headier, ” 
and will feature more of the lower, warmer, /f_irst formant tone color 
contribution. A shallow spectral slope will seem brassier, rougher, and 
therefore “chestier, ” and feature more of the second and higher formant 
tone color contributions.
Take-Away Message for Harmonics
!e voice source’s /f_ilter-shaped spectral content comprises the essential 
raw material from which the radiated complex waveform is constructed. 
!e resonator (vocal tract) does not make sound; it shapes and reinforces, 
PRAA.indb   18PRAA.indb   18 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
 The Voice Source 19
or not, acoustic energy introduced into it via the excitation of abrupt 
glottal closure. !erefore, the singer needs a su#ciently robust waveform 
with enough spectral content, freely gotten, appropriate in balance and 
roll-oﬀ for the pitch, dynamic, and aﬀect they are given to perform. 
!is healthy voice source is dependent upon the establishment of &ow 
phonation, usually through clean, complete, /f_irm but gentle glottal closure, 
an eﬀective, responsive breath/voice connection and coordination, 
appropriate laryngeal registration for the situation, and a smooth, gradual 
steepening of spectral slope with pitch ascent.
Breath management and even laryngeal registration are topics that will 
not be covered to any great extent in this text. Nonetheless, eﬀective 
coordination of breath with phonation, as well as an ability to make the 
laryngeal adjustments in vocal fold shape necessary for all pitches of the 
range, are requisite, foundational factors in establishing optimal resonance. 
We will later learn that idealized resonator adjustments can signi/f_icantly 
assist both breath management and vocal fold vibration. Vocal tract 
resonance can interact with the glottal valve in such a way that glottal 
closure is lengthened without resorting to the excess glottal resistance of 
pressed phonation. In other words, skillful resonance tuning can eﬀectively 
raise the pressure of air in the vocal tract to keep the transglottal pressure 
diﬀerence comfortably low.
Roles of the Glottal Valve
!e vocal folds have two primary jobs in phonation: glottal resistance—
the amount of closure strength (glottal competence) needed to manage the 
transglottal pressure diﬀerence and resultant air&ow from the trachea—and 
shaping for pitch—adjusting their length, mass, thickness/thinness, and 
stiﬀness in order to create all of the pitches of the singer’s range. !e more 
eﬀort they expend for the former (pressure resistance), the less &exibility 
and capability they will have for the latter (pitch shaping), limiting range 
and ease of function. Transglottal pressure diﬀerence determines both the 
degree of glottal resistance required for competent glottal closure as well 
as the impact force of the colliding vocal fold tissues. !erefore, /f_inding 
an appropriate balance of pressure, &ow, and resistance is essential not 
only to e#ciency and range but also to vocal health. Fortunately, skillful 
PRAA.indb   19PRAA.indb   19 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  20
acoustic tuning of the vocal tract can raise the air pressure above the 
glottis to counterbalance the higher tracheal (subglottic) pressures needed 
for powerful phonations, eﬀectively reducing the transglottal pressure 
diﬀerence.
Notes
1 !e tonal ideal of Western classical singing pursues perceptually “pure” 
tones—at least in its vowels. Noise involves the presence of non-harmonic 
frequencies in a sound. Some vocal styles and many consonants include 
noise elements as a part of the sound palette.
2 !e numbers used in the phonation equation are not actual 
measurements of pressure, &ow, and resistance, rather they are symbolic 
of values, with the number 1 modeling an ideal amount of each for 
any given situation. Of course, actual values will vary necessarily by 
circumstance (a dramatic tenor loud C5 versus a countertenor mezzo 
forte C5, for example), but an ideal balance as well as various imbalances 
can be conceived and modeled for each circumstance. Such modeling 
is useful for considering the nature of an imbalance and for devising 
corrective strategies.
3 Vibrational mechanism refers to a characteristic of vocal fold shape 
and vibratory pattern that is not only the result of the degree of muscle 
participation by the various laryngeal muscles that shape the vocal folds, 
but is also aﬀected by aerodynamic and acoustic factors that can trigger a 
“toggling” from one vibrational mechanism to another.
4 Intensity is the physical property for which loudness is the percept. While 
the terms are not synonymous (as with frequency and pitch: see note 5 
below), for most practical pedagogic purposes, we needn’t be concerned 
with the distinction.
5 Frequency and pitch are not synonymous terms, since pitch is our 
perception of a sound pressure pattern o/f_ten comprised of multiple 
frequencies, and can be “&atted” or “sharped” from the actual 
fundamental frequency by resonance factors. However, for most practical 
purposes, singing teachers needn’t worry about this distinction.
PRAA.indb   20PRAA.indb   20 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics
4
Overview of the Changing 
Theories of Vocal Resonance
Our understanding of how the vocal tract transfers acoustic energy from 
the voice source to the outside world has evolved considerably over the 
last /f_i/f_ty years. Before an explanation of the details of the current theory 
is given, a cursory overview of how theories of vocal resonance have 
developed will provide some context.
Resonance
Resonance is the tendency of an object or system (like the air contained 
by the vocal tract) to respond (oscillate) longer and more strongly to 
particular frequencies introduced into it. !e oscillation of frequencies 
generated by the voice source that are at or near the resonance peaks of the 
vocal tract will be greater than those frequencies that are “in the valleys” 
between and farther away from those resonance peaks.
Coupled Helmholtz Resonators
One early model of vocal resonance was based on the conception of a 
series of successively coupled Helmholtz resonators: the /f_irst two being 
the pharynx and the oral cavity, with a narrowing created by a tongue 
bulge dividing them. !e basic principle in determining the “pitch” 
PRAA.indb   21PRAA.indb   21 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  22
Overview of the Changing Theories of Vocal Resonance
(resonance frequency) of each resonator was thought to be the size of the 
contained air space and the relative size of the exit of that space. !e larger 
the space and the smaller the exit of a Helmholtz resonator, the lower its 
resonance frequency. !erefore, an [i] with its large pharyngeal space and 
narrow, rather frontal exit into the oral cavity was thought to create a low 
“pitched” /f_irst resonance. !at resonance would then be coupled with the 
small space in front of the tongue hump with a larger exit (relative to the 
small oral space) at the lips, creating a higher “pitched” second resonance. 
!e explanatory eﬀectiveness of this theory was best for front vowels 
like [i], but less convincing for back vowels like [u], which has a low /f_irst 
resonance even though it has a relatively smaller pharyngeal space. !e 
coupled resonator theory le/f_t the tuning mechanism of higher resonances 
somewhat in question. It also did not account for the epilaryngeal tube, 
nor consider the functioning of the entire vocal tract as a single tube with 
multiple resonance peaks. !e accurate observation that larger spaces 
with smaller exits create lower resonances contributes to the innate but 
misleading sense that the pharynx is more associated with the lower, 
darker /f_irst resonance and the oral cavity with the higher, brighter second.
Linear Source-Filter Model
A more recent model—the linear source-/f_ilter model—presents 
vocal acoustics as being comprised of three elements: a power source 
(breath pressure and &ow), a source vibration (formed by the vocal fold 
oscillation), and a resonator (the vocal tract), which /f_ilters the input from 
the source, selectively strengthening or weakening partials from the voice 
source. !is model recognized that the tuning of vocal tract resonances 
could be more eﬀectively explained from a single, quarter-wave resonator 
model. A quarter-wave resonator is a tube closed at one end (the glottis) 
and open at the other (the lips). Sound waves or wave segments that 
have a pressure node at the lips and an antinode at the glottis will be 
re&ected (“echoed”) productively within the tube, building up standing 
waves, that is, resonance frequencies that are then featured in the radiated 
sound as formants. !is oppositional node:antinode circumstance /f_irst 
happens at one-fourth of a wavelength. !erefore, a closed-open tube is 
a resonator that naturally resonates a sound wave four times its length, 
PRAA.indb   22PRAA.indb   22 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
 Overview of the Changing Theories of Vocal Resonance 23
hence its designation, a ¼ or “quarter-wave” resonator. Uniformly shaped 
quarter-wave resonators reinforce sound   waves that are odd-numbered 
multiples of this lowest resonance frequency, all of which have nodes 
and antinodes at opposite ends of the vocal tract. !e waveforms of each 
higher resonance have additional pressure nodes (contextual “zeros”) and 
antinodes (maxima and minima) at various places along the vocal tract 
(Figure 4.1).
Perturbation Theory
!ose resonances can then be retuned by local perturbations (narrowings 
or widenings). A perturbation near a pressure node or antinode of a wave 
eﬀectively changes the length, and hence the resonance frequency of 
that wave. !e /f_irst two, lower vocal tract resonances have fewer nodes 
and antinodes, are therefore more susceptible to fewer, more simple 
perturbations (are more easily tunable). !ey also cover the frequency 
range of all vowel-like spectral tone colors, making the /f_irst two resonances 
both the most available and the most relevant for vowel de/f_inition and 
diﬀerentiation.
Figure 4.1 Schematic of the pressure nodes and antinodes of the ﬁrst 
three resonances of the vocal tract.
PRAA.indb   23PRAA.indb   23 7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  24
!e source-/f_ilter model was initially assumed to be strictly linear: a 
power source (breath) bringing the vocal folds into vibration, generating 
a set of harmonic frequencies which then proceed up and out. Some of 
these source harmonics are then selectively strengthened by the resonances 
of the vocal tract before /f_inally being radiated from the lips. !ough the 
vocal tract is not a uniform tube, this model is conceptually useful and 
explanatory, but erroneously implies an independence and chronologically 
temporal sequence of source and /f_ilter, a somewhat inaccurate origin and 
implied completeness of a harmonic frequency set, and falls short of 
explaining the inherent non-linear interactivity of resonator and vibrator.
Non-Linear Source-Filter Model
An even more recent version proposed a non-linear source-/f_ilter model 
with some degree of inherent interactivity from the onset, and potential 
for great interactive non-linearity with certain resonance tunings. As 
reported above, the voice source signal is interactively generated from the 
start. In certain circumstances (more on this later: See Non-linear Source-
Filter !eory Revisited, p. 73) acoustic energy reverberating in the /f_ilter 
can raise the eﬀective pressure above the glottis, productively reducing the 
transglottal pressure diﬀerence, and assisting the e#ciency and power of 
both vibrator and respiratory coordination.
The Transient Theory of Voice
All of the above cited theories highlight the frequency domain. Sound 
is actually generated in the time domain, in which events, such as 
pressure variations, occur or unfold in succession over time. Frequency 
measures how o/f_ten an event occurs within a given time span, as in the 
“times-per-second” designation of Hertz. An early model of voice, the 
transient theory, models voice as an additive pressure accumulation 
generated by the succession of individual glottal impulses. !is theory 
accurately recognizes that the vocal folds do not generate a complete set 
of harmonics with a spectral slope prior to resonation and /f_iltering by the 
PRAA.indb   24PRAA.indb   24 7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM
 Overview of the Changing Theories of Vocal Resonance 25
vocal tract. Instead, the abrupt closure of each single glottal pulse excites 
the air column of the vocal tract, causing an impulse containing a broad 
sweep of frequencies that immediately re&ects vocal tract resonances, 
that is, the sound transfer function of the vocal tract shape. In this way, 
resonances and radiated formants occur in a simultaneous combination 
of source and /f_ilter at each glottal impulse, prior to the reinforcement of 
harmonic frequency energy and content. Only at the periodic reiteration 
of those resonance-shaped impulses is a subset of the frequencies that 
are in sync with the periodicity of the successive pulse sequence, that is, 
some of its harmonic frequencies, reinforced, while other frequencies 
that are out of phase with the repeated successive glottal closing events 
are suppressed. !e time period during which this occurs is so brief, so 
immediate, as to be eﬀectively simultaneous to human perception. Only 
those frequencies that are both favored by the vocal tract transfer function 
(are near its resonance peaks) in each individual pulse and are also in 
sync (are harmonic) with the periodicity of the subsequent succession of 
glottic pulses are reinforced to survive and be represented in the complex, 
radiated waveform.
Summary
To summarize, though the non-linear source-/f_ilter theory is a helpful, 
simpli/f_ied model, voice is not actually created as a complete set of harmonic 
frequencies arising from the vocal folds with a particular spectral slope, 
that is subsequently /f_iltered by the resonances of the vocal tract. Source 
and /f_ilter are completely complicit and interactive from the start. Voice 
is more a sequence of &ow-interruption-resonance-shaped impulses that 
are then rapidly /f_iltered further in time by the periodicity of successive 
glottal closures. Again, only those frequencies that survived the initial 
/f_ilter characteristics and also are in sync with the period of the ongoing 
glottal impulses are represented in the radiated waveform. !at radiated 
waveform then re&ects the “hills and valleys” of the resonance structure of 
the vocal tract by featuring that subset of harmonics of the fundamental 
frequency that populate those “hills” with an overall spectral sloping of its 
frequency peaks.
PRAA.indb   25PRAA.indb   25 7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  26
Model Advice
!e complexity of these models may initially seem daunting and 
overwhelm the comprehension needed for practical application. However, 
since all acoustic transitions of range are predictable by the intervallic 
relationship between the several lower harmonics of the sung pitch and 
the /f_irst resonance of the vowel being sung, those transitions can be clearly 
and simply charted. Both the /f_irst resonance:/f_irst formant locations of 
vowels and the lowest three intervals of the harmonic series of a pitch are 
easily learnable and mappable, informing the attention and awareness of 
both teacher and singer (Figure 4.2).
Figure 4.2 Levels of acoustic events: There will be an acoustic register 
transition (timbral and somatosensory migration) at every notation on 
this chart relative to the vowel formant at the top of each column. The 
pitches are notated at harmonic intervals below the ﬁrst formants (one 
octave, an octave and a ﬁfth, two octaves). For more detail, see Chapter 
6: Resonance:Harmonic Interactions.
PRAA.indb   26PRAA.indb   26 7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics
5
Resonances and Formants
Vocal Tract
!e vocal tract is a tube that is open at one end (lips) and mostly closed 
at the other (glottis). As mentioned above, that makes it a quarter-wave 
resonator, with a primary resonance or standing wave at the frequency of 
a sound wave that is four times as long as the vocal tract. Such resonators 
also have resonances at higher frequencies, whose standing wavelengths 
within the vocal tract are odd-numbered multiples of one-fourth: 3/4, 
5/4, 7/4, and so on, all of which have nodal and anti-nodal segments 
at opposite ends of the tube ( Figure 4.1). Hard-walled resonators—like 
brass instruments—will only resonate partials at rather speci/f_ic, narrowed 
frequency locations. Being a so/f_t-walled, shapeable tube, the vocal tract 
has resonances with frequency bandwidths that are wider and less sharply 
tuned than other quarter-wave instruments. !is enables the vocal tract 
to reinforce source partials that are merely in the vicinity of its resonance 
frequency peaks. Frequencies that fall midway between widely spaced 
vocal tract resonances will be signi/f_icantly weakened, if not suppressed 
altogether.
Resonances and Formants
Since the vocal tract is a shapeable, non-uniform tube, its natural resonances 
are tunable—within limits—to wavelengths other than those listed above. 
!ese vocal tract resonances  are called formants in much voice science 
and pedagogic literature, treating the two terms as synonymous. Formants 
PRAA.indb   27PRAA.indb   27 7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  28
Resonances and Formants
are actually the spectral peaks of the radiated sound, re&ecting how vocal 
tract resonances have /f_iltered voice source frequencies. Tube resonances 
(the potential of the tube to /f_ilter and transfer sound from the glottis to 
the lips) and formants (the actual spectral peaks of the resultant, radiated 
sound) would only be identical if the resonance peaks are tuned precisely 
to periodicity-reinforced harmonics, or conversely, if harmonics land 
precisely at resonance peaks. !e harmonics of low pitches, whose many 
closely spaced harmonics fall within the lower resonances of the vocal 
tract, su#ciently populate them, so that resonance peaks and radiated 
formant peaks are essentially the same. (See Figure 5.1.) At higher sung 
pitches, potential source harmonics are widely spaced relative to vocal 
tract resonances, and unless the vocal tract is retuned via active vowel 
modi/f_ication, there may be no harmonic at or near a resonance peak. In 
this case, radiated formants vary signi/f_icantly from vocal tract resonances. 
Indeed, there may be rather more potential vocal tract resonances than 
the realized, perceived radiated formants. (See Figure 5.2). !is becomes 
signi/f_icant at higher sung pitches. !is text will herea/f_ter use these terms 
in their narrower de/f_inition for maximal clarity: resonances will refer to 
the sound transfer potential of the vocal tract, and formants will refer to 
the realized spectral peaks in the actual, resultant sound as radiated and 
heard.
Figure 5.1 Sound transfer characteristics of the vocal tract resonances. 
This image shows vocal tract resonances (curved outline) well populated 
with voice source harmonics (vertical lines), making vocal tract resonances 
and radiated formants essentially identical.
PRAA.indb   28PRAA.indb   28 7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM
 Resonances and Formants 29
Resonance and Formant Locations
!ere are typically only three to /f_ive resonances low enough in frequency 
and resultant formants strong enough in intensity to be of great aural 
signi/f_icance for Western classical singing. Higher spectral content does 
make an aural contribution, somewhat to treble voices and especially to 
many popular genres. !e frequency locations of resonances are the result 
of the length and shape of the vocal tract/tube (Titze, 1994).  Tube length 
determines the general location of the entire set of resonances:
 z the longer the tube, the lower the frequencies of the set of resonances, 
resulting in more radiated formants that are aurally prominent in 
classical genre.
 z the shorter the tube, the higher and more widely spaced the 
frequencies of the set of resonances, resulting in fewer radiated 
formants that are aurally prominent in classical genre.
 z Resonances and spectral content higher than 5000 Hz are especially 
present in the brighter, more speech-like timbres of CCM vocal genres.
Since where the resonances lie depends primarily upon tube length, and 
their resultant formants determine overall vocal timbre, then tube length 
Figure 5.2 Sound transfer characteristics of the vocal tract resonances. 
This image shows vocal tract resonances (curved outline) inadequately 
populated with voice source harmonics (vertical lines), creating a large 
difference between resonances and radiated formants.
PRAA.indb   29PRAA.indb   29 7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  30
is a signi/f_icant factor in determining and maintaining the vocal category 
or Fach (the voice type) of classical singers. Singers who allow their larynx 
location—and thereby, their tube length—to constantly change with pitch 
change will achieve a less uni/f_ied timbre and a less consistent timbral 
category (sopranos in their extreme high range excepted).
Number of Resonances and 
Formants
Vocal tract resonances are theoretically in/f_inite in number, but only three 
to /f_ive (depending upon voice type or vocal tract length) are of great 
timbral signi/f_icance, falling within the heart of strongest audibility range 
(roughly, the pitch range of the keyboard, below ca. 4200 Hz, and within 
the spectral tone color range that diﬀerentiates vowels, from just below C5 
to just above C7; ca. 400–2100 Hz). 1 Within the keyboard range, basses 
typically have /f_ive resonances, sopranos three, and most everyone else 
four. In scienti/f_ic studies, resonance frequency peaks are notated fR1, fR2, fR3,  
for “the frequency of resonance number one, the frequency of resonance 
two, the frequency of resonance three. ” Formant frequency peaks are 
numbered F1, F2, F3, read as “the /f_irst formant, the second formant, the 
third formant. ” For simplicity, the former can be referred to as the /f_irst 
resonance, second resonance, the third resonance, and the latter, the /f_irst 
formant, second formant, the third formant.
Madde Exploration 3: Resonation of source /f_iltered harmonics by vocal 
tract resonances; harmonic:resonance crossings
The Roles Resonances and 
Formants Play
Vowel Formants
!e /f_irst two vocal tract resonances are both the most responsive to 
perturbations of the vocal tract shape and also cover the spectral tone 
PRAA.indb   30PRAA.indb   30 7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM
 Resonances and Formants 31
color frequencies needed for vowels. !us, they are the most available, 
tunable, and responsible for diﬀerentiating and de/f_ining vowels. !eir 
resultant radiated formants are therefore referred to as the vowel 
formants. Vocal tract resonances are tuned primarily by adjusting where 
and to what extent a bulge or hump of the tongue internally narrows the 
vocal tract and by the size of the tube exit (jaw and mouth opening and lip 
shape). An internal narrowing nearer to the front (nearer the lips) causes 
a lower /f_irst resonance and a higher second resonance. A narrowing 
nearer the back causes a higher /f_irst resonance and a lower second 
resonance. Lip rounding lowers both resonances, especially the /f_irst, and 
lip spreading raises both resonances, especially the /f_irst. Furthermore, 
the degree of mouth opening and tongue dorsum height dominate the 
tuning of fR1 (opening the mouth and/or lowering the dorsum raises 
fR1) and the tongue dorsum location along and closeness to the palate 
dominate the tuning of fR2 (a fronted dorsum/palatal narrowing raises fR2 
and a backed and/or lowered dorsum narrowing lowers fR2). !is tuning 
of the shape of the vocal tract is generally referenced in speech literature 
as articulation. It is more simply motivated by expression and auditory 
targets (composite over- a n d  under-vowel2 tone color content) than 
by attempting micromanagement of the biomechanics of articulation, 
though some intentional awareness of the latter can be helpful. For 
example, awareness of tongue dorsum height and location relative to 
the palate can initially assist in discovering and approximating the best 
resonance of a vowel, though expression plus intended timbral targets 
and somatosense will eventually tune the system with greater speci/f_icity 
(Figure 5.3). 
Figure 5.3 Spectrographic model of the ﬁrst two radiated formants, the 
vowel formants.
PRAA.indb   31PRAA.indb   31 7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  32
Vowel Modiﬁcation
Moving the /f_irst two radiated formants around by reshaping the vocal tract 
amounts to adjusting or even changing the vowel category, retuning its 
resonances, ideally while preserving vocal tract length for overall timbral 
unity. !is is usually what is meant by the term vowel modi/f_ication. Since 
this involves intentional reshaping of the vocal tract from habituated 
speech postures,  this might more accurately be called active vowel 
modi/f_ication, since vowel timbre also necessarily migrates with pitch 
change alone, that is, without shape change. (More later.)
The Roles of the First Formant
!e /f_irst formant contributes to depth, fullness, and roundness of 
timbre, and determines the openness-closeness dimension of vowels. 
Furthermore, as we will learn, all acoustic (as distinct from laryngeal) 
registration events are caused by or related to interactions between the 
/f_irst vocal tract resonance and voice source harmonics moving through it. 
A few signi/f_icant acoustic phenomena also involve the second vocal tract 
resonance.
Depth or Fullness of Timbre
!e /f_irst formant, being the lowest resonance of a voice, is most responsible 
for depth and fullness of timbre, that is, the strength of lower harmonics 
in the sound (also described as warmth or roundness). First formants 
lie between ca. C4 and A5, usually in contact with the treble clef (D4-
G5), in the spectral tone color range of [u], [o], and the beginning of [ ɔ]. 
!erefore, the /f_irst resonance of the vocal tract adds a “warming” [~u] or 
[~o]-like tone color to the composite vowel percept. !e /f_irst resonances 
and formants of any given voice typically vary by about an octave across 
all vowels, from the lowest of an [i] vowel to the highest /f_irst formant of 
an [ɑ]. It is necessary to have at least one source harmonic near (within 
the bandwidth of) the /f_irst resonance frequency peak in order to be fully 
PRAA.indb   32PRAA.indb   32 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
 Resonances and Formants 33
resonant and to have timbral depth. !is becomes especially important 
for the upper range of treble voices. If no source harmonic is being 
ampli/f_ied by the /f_irst resonance, the tone will lack fullness and become 
thin or shrill, being dominated by the bright spectral content featured 
by higher formants. A functional exception to this is the whistle register, 
which is typically much less full in timbre anyway, though in some singers 
remarkably resonant. In the latter case, the fundamental or /f_irst harmonic 
is probably being resonated by a clustering of resonances one and two, or 
possibly just by the second resonance. It is useful to know that the lower 
the frequency of the /f_irst resonance peak relative to the vowel being sung, 
the more settled and unconstricted the throat (laryngopharynx) and 
convergent the resonator is likely to be.
Openness-Closeness Dimension of 
Vowels
!e frequency of the /f_irst formant is also correlated with the openness 
or closeness  of a vowel. Close vowels  such as [i] or [u] have low /f_irst 
formants. Open vowels such as [ ɛ], [ɔ], or [ ɑ] have high /f_irst formants. 
!erefore, the higher the /f_irst formant, the more open the vowel; the lower 
the /f_irst formant, the closer the vowel. As with colors, in which a range of 
frequencies is identi/f_ied by a single color designation (red, for example), 
so it also is with vowels. Within a single vowel identity, the higher the 
/f_irst formant tuning, the more open the pronunciation will sound, and the 
lower the /f_irst formant, the closer the pronunciation. As the /f_irst formant 
moves up or down, at some point the perceived vowel identity may shi/f_t  
to that of a neighboring vowel, just as shades of red at some point morph 
into a shade of orange or of purple. For example, raising the /f_irst formant 
of an [i] eventually may shi/f_t its timbre to [ɪ], and of an [e] to an [ ɛ], or 
vice versa if lowering the /f_irst formant, especially when this also involves 
some retuning of the second formant, whose frequency, for most vowels, 
is critical in determining the vowel-de/f_ining target spectral tone color 
being contributed. !e /f_irst resonance and its resultant formant are raised 
by mouth opening and tongue dorsum lowering. Some independence of 
/f_irst and second formant tuning is possible, but the /f_irst formant target 
frequency can only be raised so far by mouth opening without resorting 
PRAA.indb   33PRAA.indb   33 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  34
to tongue dorsum lowering. Tongue dorsum lowering will also lower the 
second resonance and its formant.
Harmonic Interactions with the 
First Resonance
Whenever a source harmonic passes through the /f_irst vocal tract resonance 
there is an audible eﬀect (some degree of closing or opening of the timbre 
with an accompanying, simultaneous passive vowel modi/f_ication or 
migration), which is perceivable as an acoustic registration phenomenon. 
!ese harmonic:resonance crossings and their acoustic eﬀects are o/f_ten 
instinctively avoided by raising the /f_irst resonance, an innate response that 
must be trained away for classical singing timbre (more later). All acoustic 
registration events have primarily to do with harmonic interactions with 
the /f_irst resonance of the vocal tract.3 It is therefore pedagogically essential 
to know the /f_irst formant locations of the cardinal vowels and the general 
frequency location contour of the entire /f_irst formant set (see Figure 6.4, 
p. 50 and Appendix 2: Approximate First Formant Locations by Voice, p. 179).
The Roles of the Second Formant
!e second formant plays a role in the vowel de/f_ining spectral tone color 
for most vowels, the front-back dimension of vowels (due to a relative 
brightness factor), and in boosting brilliance in upper voice resonance 
strategies of tenors and baritones, as well as in middle voice resonance 
strategies of treble voices and treble voice belters.
Vowel Clarity/Deﬁnition
Although both /f_irst and second formants participate in vowel timbre, the 
second formant is perceptually more responsible for clarity of de/f_inition 
and the actual spectral tone color of most vowels.  !is is perhaps due to 
PRAA.indb   34PRAA.indb   34 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
 Resonances and Formants 35
its innate (though mistaken) perceptual association with the oral cavity, 
with the fact that the second formant varies more consistently across 
all vowels than the /f_irst formant, whose location is duplicated across 
the front and back vowels, and with the fact that the spectral tone color 
frequencies of cardinal vowels other than [u] and [o] lie within second 
formant range. !e frequency peaks of the second resonances of the vocal 
tract lie between ca. F5 and D7, and mostly between G5 and C7. Within 
a given voice the second resonance spans the interval of about a 10th. 
Since this is the spectral tone color range of [ ɔ ɑ a æ ɛ e i], the radiated 
formants of the second resonance de/f_ine these vowels. For these reasons it 
is an instinctive though poor resonance strategy to exaggerate oral shape 
diﬀerences to improve clarity of diction. Excessive orality is usually at odds 
with chiaroscuro balanced resonance (page 38 below) and with bene/f_icial 
interactive feedback of resonance to vocal fold vibration. !e perceptual 
dominance of the second formant in vowel identity is also apparent in 
onomatopoeic sound associations: words descriptive of high sounds (such 
as tweet, scream, sizzle), o/f_ten contain vowels with high-frequency second 
formants, while words descriptive of mid (pound, shout) and low (moan, 
groan, coo) sounds contain vowels with mid and low-frequency second 
formants.
Front-Back Designation of Vowels
!e second formant is also responsible for the perceived front or back 
designation of a vowel. Front vowels, such as [i], have a high second formant 
while back vowels, such as [u], have a low second formant. As mentioned 
above, second formants lie approximately between F5 and D7, starting 
just above the treble clef, and vary about a tenth across all vowels within a 
given voice. !e front/back percept is due to the relative brightness of its 
frequency peak (higher is brighter, lower is darker) and the proximity of the 
second formant to either the /f_irst formant (as in [u]) or third formant (as in 
[i]). Proximate formants are mutually reinforcing. Like party animals, when 
they get together, they make more noise! !erefore, a low second formant 
would reinforce the /f_irst formant, boosting the low-frequency components 
of the timbre, adding more warming [~u] or [~o]-like spectral tone color to 
the composite vowel percept), and creating a “back” vowel percept. A high 
PRAA.indb   35PRAA.indb   35 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  36
second formant would reinforce the singer’s formant cluster, boosting 
the brighter, treble [~e] to [~i]-like spectral components of the timbre, 
creating a “front” vowel percept. Front-back dimension corresponds also 
to tongue shape: a fronted tongue creates a smaller frontal space and a 
higher second formant, while a less fronted tongue creates a narrowing 
nearer the back of the oral cavity and possibly a lower second formant. 
It is a universal, innate percept to sense bright as being in front and dark 
in back. !is percept leads to an unsatisfactory, binary, either/or extreme 
of timbral opposition. Counterintuitively, the front-back tuning of vowels 
does not correspond to their locational somatosense (“placement” percept 
or sensation of vibrational locus) in best vocal function. Resonance tuning 
is more eﬀectively balanced by conceptually reversing this orientation to 
sensing bright tone colors in back and dark in front.
Second Formant Strategies
!e second formant also plays a prominent role in the upper voice 
resonance strategy for a signi/f_icant percentage of premier non-treble 
singers, especially tenors. When the second harmonic of the voice source 
loses power as it surpasses the frequency peak of the /f_irst resonance—
that is, when the voice “turns over” or “closes”—professional tenors and 
baritones will o/f_ten modify resonances in order to boost the second 
formant by tuning the second resonance to activate an available, higher 
source harmonic in order to achieve an especially ringing top (Donald 
Miller 2008). A similar strategy is used by some classical treble voices in 
their middle range and by treble voice belters to extend a mixed belt timbre 
higher. (More on this later: see Second Formant Strategies Revisited, p. 54.)
Singer’s Formant Cluster (SFC)
Higher resonances (three and higher: ( fR3) can be organized with certain 
shape conditions (a settled larynx, a relatively open laryngopharynx, and 
a narrowed epilaryngeal exit) to create a cluster of radiated formants. 
!is forms the so-called singer’s formant cluster (SFC) , that ringing 
quality associated with professional classical singers that gives them 
carrying power over orchestras (Sundberg 1974; Titze and Story 1997). 
PRAA.indb   36PRAA.indb   36 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
 Resonances and Formants 37
It is most characteristic of non-treble voices, but also of treble voices in 
their middle and lower registers, that is, for sung pitches below ca. D5. 
!e singer’s formant cluster lies within the top octave of the piano (C7 
to C8), usually in the middle of that octave (2300–3500 Hz.) where the 
human ear is very sensitive to loudness.  !is is because the human ear 
canal is also a quarter-wave resonator whose primary resonance is in the 
2000–4000 Hz range, where healthy human hearing is most sensitive to 
intensity. Any frequencies entering the ear canal within that range will 
receive a strong resonance boost on the way to the eardrum. Once a sung 
pitch itself is su#ciently high relative to human hearing sensitivity, vocal 
loudness becomes less dependent upon the singer’s formant cluster and 
increasingly dependent upon the strength of the fundamental frequency 
being resonated by the /f_irst resonance and featured as the /f_irst formant 
(whoop timbre). For this reason, the singer’s formant cluster plays a 
decreasing role in the upper registers of treble voices.
Relationship of the SFC to Vocal Fach
!e frequency location of the singer’s formant cluster is primarily 
determined by the length of the vocal tract, and is signi/f_icant for overall 
timbre and thus for vocal Fach (voice category) determination. In general, 
the longer the tube, the lower the SFC, and the lower the resultant vocal 
Fach; the shorter the tube, the higher the SFC and Fach. Keeping tube 
length relatively stable across range and vowels is therefore a key factor in 
unifying and stabilizing the timbre and consistency of the perceived Fach 
of the voice in Western classical genre. !is is somewhat less of a concern 
in CCM (Contemporary Commercial Music) genres.
Relationship of the SFC to 
Resonance Balance and 
Interactivity
Balanced resonance involves some degree of parity between the strength of 
high and low partials of the radiated sound, at least for pitches below ca. D5. 
!is is usually accomplished by a balance between the depth-responsible 
PRAA.indb   37PRAA.indb   37 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  38
/f_irst formant and the ring-responsible singer’s formant cluster. According 
to some studies, the creation of the singer’s formant cluster requires a six 
to one diﬀerential between the area of the pharynx and the outlet of the 
epilarynx (Sundberg 1974; Titze and Story 1997). !is condition is only 
met when the larynx is comfortably low, the laryngopharynx relaxed 
open, and the aryepiglottic exit narrowed. !ose very conditions create a 
convergent resonator, a relatively lower /f_irst formant, and ensure timbral 
depth. !is means that the consistency of the singer’s formant cluster is 
depth-dependent. !at is to say, classic SFC is not just about achieving 
“ring, ” but actually only occurs when accompanied by timbral depth, 
creating the balanced resonance of  chiaroscuro. While a voice may have 
strong higher formants and be “bright” in timbre, it does not have classic 
singer’s formant cluster unless the higher formants are drawn together by 
an accompanying depth. In this way SFC creates a situation of acoustic 
reactance and inertance, interactivity factors that can result in more 
overall acoustic power for less breath pressure or glottal resistance. Other 
genres’ forms of high spectral content (pharyngeal voice, twang, belting, 
etc.) involve various pharyngeal narrowing strategies. (Obert 2019). !ere 
is also newer evidence that the SFC is additionally enhanced by a variety 
of micro-adjustments along the length of the vocal tract (Story 2016).
E/uniFB00ect of the Piriform Sinuses
!e piriform sinuses, spaces which branch oﬀ to the sides of the epilarynx, 
have the eﬀect of negating resonance in the 4000–6000 Hz region, thereby 
highlighting the singer’s formant cluster and suppressing formants that 
might lie just above it (Delvaux and Howard 2014). Narrowing the 
laryngopharynx closes the piriform sinuses, essentially “hugging” the 
epi-laryngeal tube, and boosting a wide spread of high-frequency source 
partials without clustering formants. !is resonance strategy is routinely 
used as one option by various genres other than classical that desire a very 
bright timbre without complementary depth, but may also be a practice of 
some classical singers. It is a way to create the so-called pharyngeal voice 
or voce di strega (witch voice) quality.
PRAA.indb   38PRAA.indb   38 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
 Resonances and Formants 39
Vocal Tract Sound Transfer 
Characteristics
As shown earlier in Figure 3.1, p. 12, a power spectrum displays power 
on the vertical and frequency on the horizontal. A spectral envelope  
outlining the resonance characteristics of a particular vocal tract shape 
would then display that vocal tract’s ability to transfer acoustic energy 
(sound) from the glottis to the outside world (Figures 5.4 and 5.5).
Formants Relative to the Keyboard
If the frequency dimension of a power spectrum is adjusted to be 
logarithmic, like pitch on a piano keyboard, the relative locations of its 
resonances and their formants are more easily grasped by musicians. 
Figure 5.5  shows the same vowel as Figure 5.4 , (an [i]), adjusted to a 
logarithmic scale. !e high location of the second resonance puts all 
resonances other than the /f_irst near or in the top octave of the piano, 
leaving a large “valley” between the /f_irst and second formants of the [i]. 
!is explains its relative “brightness” but also its potential thinness if no 
Figure 5.4 A power spectrum of the vocal tract for the vowel [i] with a 
linear frequency scale.
PRAA.indb   39PRAA.indb   39 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  40
Figure 5.5 A power spectrum of the vocal tract for the vowel [i] with a 
logarithmic frequency scale adjusted to the keyboard.
harmonic is being resonated by its /f_irst formant. With the lowest /f_irst 
formant and the highest second formant of all vowels, a well produced [i] 
can have excellent chiaroscuro timbral balance.  
Notes
1 Human audible range can extend to ca. 20,000 Hz, which is over 
two octaves beyond the range of the keyboard (to ca. Eb10). While 
frequencies that lie beyond the piano keyboard are present in certain 
consonants, and do contribute to tonal timbre, especially in singing 
styles other than classical, and as a roughness percept in certain vocal 
categories, they do not usually play a dominant role in Western classical 
resonance tuning. Frequencies above 4200 Hz do not contribute much 
to vowel identity, rather primarily to the degree and kind of auditory 
roughness, lending a speech-like clarity and quality to higher pitches of 
popular genres.
2 See De/f_initions. For more detail, consult Kinesthetic Voice Pedagogy2 
(Bozeman 2021).
PRAA.indb   40PRAA.indb   40 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
 Resonances and Formants 41
3 Acoustic registration refers to audible timbral shi/f_ts associated with 
a perceived change in registration, which are not due to laryngeal 
mechanism, but rather to changing relationships between source 
harmonics and vocal tract resonances. Harmonic interactions with 
the second resonance—which are o/f_ten also crucial to acoustic 
registration events—are dependent upon and in that sense secondary 
to harmonic interactions with the /f_irst resonance, though no less 
important.
PRAA.indb   41PRAA.indb   41 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
PRAA.indb   42PRAA.indb   42 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics
6
Harmonic:Resonance 
Interactions
Vocal resonance is the result of the interactions between voice source 
partials (frequencies) and vocal tract resonances. In general, we want 
approximate matches between our resonance tunings and those 
harmonics of the pitch being sung that are available for resonation. 
Harmonics may lose power more rapidly on the high side of a resonance 
frequency peak due to reactance (Titze). Since we have no control over 
the frequency location of the harmonics (they are determined by the pitch 
we are required to sing), the main factor that we can aﬀect in order to 
be resonant is the frequency location (tuning) of the /f_irst two vocal tract 
resonances and their resultant radiated formants. !eir tuning results 
from our vowel conception and intention and from expressive, aﬀective 
motivation. !e Western classical singer will want the frequency location 
of the clustered higher formants to be as stable as possible for consistency 
of overall timbre and Fach. However, the /f_irst two resonances can be tuned 
to amplify available harmonics when necessary.
Harmonic:First Resonance 
Interactions
While interaction between source-reinforced harmonics and all 
resonances is important, interactions with the /f_irst resonance are 
especially signi/f_icant. If no harmonics land within the bandwidth of the 
PRAA.indb   43PRAA.indb   43 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  44
Harmonic:Resonance Interactions
/f_irst resonance, ideally below its frequency peak, the overall sound will 
be weaker and thinner. !ere needs to be at least one harmonic near that 
peak to be activated and resonated by it in order to have fullness and 
depth. If there are two or more harmonics below the /f_irst resonance, that 
is, when singing lower pitches, there is little need for resonance/ formant 
tuning, since, in that situation there will usually be plenty of harmonics 
available for resonation by the /f_irst, second, and higher resonances. With 
higher fundamental frequencies, harmonics are more widely spaced 
relative to resonance frequencies, leaving fewer harmonics within the 
bandwidths of the /f_irst two resonances to be featured. !erefore, more 
attention to resonance/formant tuning becomes necessary when singing 
higher pitches.
Possible Resonance:Harmonic 
Interactions
!ere are four possible interactions between resonances and harmonics: 
(1) a resonance can allow a moving harmonic to pass through it (opening 
or closing the timbre); (2) a resonance can move across a stable harmonic 
(a change of vowel and possibly of acoustic register on the same pitch); 
(3) a resonance can be steadily retuned to track a moving harmonic (as in 
yelling, belting, or whooping), sometimes called formant tracking; and 
(4) a resonance can be “detuned” away from a harmonic (by raising fR1 
to stay above the sung pitch to remain in close timbre and avoid whoop 
timbre on close vowels by non-treble voices or belters; or by reducing 
higher formant clustering as a strategy in the upper treble voice range to 
eliminate the shrillness eﬀect of strong higher formants).
Timbral Opening and Closing
Whenever a source harmonic passes through and above the /f_irst resonance, 
there is an aural eﬀect described as a perceptual closing of the timbre. 
Whenever a harmonic drops below the /f_irst resonance, the timbre can be 
heard to open to some degree.
PRAA.indb   44PRAA.indb   44 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
 Harmonic:Resonance Interactions 45
Open Timbre
When two or more harmonics lie at or below the /f_irst resonance, the 
timbre is described as open timbre  ( voce aperta  in Italian); the more 
harmonics below the /f_irst resonance, the more open the timbre. In other 
words, open timbre occurs when singing an octave or more below the /f_irst 
resonance of the vowel being sung. Open timbre might be described as 
bright, straightforward, clear, fresh, exposed, coming more directly out of 
the mouth, and—if low enough in pitch—buzzy. If unskillfully taken too 
high, open timbre can become blatant or spread as in a raw yell. Belting 
is a skillful variation of open timbre at higher pitches.  When the /f_irst 
resonance is tuned to the second harmonic, or conversely, as the second 
harmonic approaches the peak frequency of the /f_irst resonance, an fR1:2fo 
acoustic coupling occurs, which forms an especially strong form of open 
timbre, characterized by ringing clarity and power from enhanced higher 
spectral content. !is is such a strong acoustic coupling that we o/f_ten 
instinctively adjust for it when power and projection are needed. Novice 
singers tend to track this higher into yell timbre by an increasingly open, 
divergent vocal tract shaping.
Yell Coupling
If this fR1:2fo open timbre coupling is maintained or tracked above the 
normal fR1 location of the vowel being sung by raising the /f_irst resonance 
in tandem with the rising second harmonic, the singer has moved into yell 
timbre. !is is  a valuable resonance strategy when needed in life and is 
quite common in musical theater, popular, folk, and world music idioms, 
but yell timbre is avoided in Western classical singing. !ese non-classical 
vocal styles can be said to exploit the expressive power and “naturalness” 
of more or less skillful yelling. !e ability to yell is apparently an inherited, 
universal, and strong survival instinct. Overcoming this instinct is crucial 
in training young non-treble voices to negotiate their passaggi successfully 
with Western classical timbre. On the contrary, carefully managing an 
e#cient, skillful form of it is crucial to training musical theater belt timbre 
(Figure 6.1). 
PRAA.indb   45PRAA.indb   45 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  46
Yell Characteristics
Y ell timbre and function are 
accomplished by raising the /f_irst 
resonance through tube shortening 
(larynx raising), pharynx narrowing, 
and mouth widening, that is, by 
creating a divergent resonator shape. 
!e /f_irst two of these maneuvers 
are accomplished by activating 
swallowing muscles which raise 
and constrict the laryngopharynx, 
narrowing the throat, preventing the 
use of the classically described singer’s 
formant cluster and chiaroscuro 
timbre and in&uencing the vibrator 
function toward pressed phonation. Furthermore, yelling is typically done 
on open vowels like [a] or [ ɛ], because their high /f_irst formant locations 
and inherently more divergent shapes make them more compatible with 
the acoustic requirements of the yell (try yelling on a pure [u]!). !e yell is 
chest register (TA) or mechanism one dominant. !ese maneuvers result 
in the raised and forward-reaching chin of the young biological male 
accommodating a rising larynx, plus a widened vowel posture.
Figure 6.1 Open timbre coupling of fR1:2fo: If this coupling is carried higher 
by tube shortening, it creates the “spread” timbre of a yell.
PRAA.indb   46PRAA.indb   46 7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM7/10/2025   4:38:50 PM
 Harmonic:Resonance Interactions 47
Close Timbre
When the second harmonic crosses su#ciently above the /f_irst vocal tract 
resonance, the timbre is heard to close or turn over. !is crossing is the 
primary acoustic registration event of non-treble (bass, baritone, tenor) 
voices. Close timbre ( voce chiusa 1 in Italian) is variously described 
as seeming domed, tipped, smoother, rounder, more collected, or 
concentrated, above the palate or higher in sensation in the head, and 
somewhat less direct or exposed (covered). !is occurs when the sung 
pitch is less than an octave below the /f_irst resonance of the vowel being 
sung. It is a necessary component of Western classical upper voice 
training since, unlike other vocal styles, it enables the non-treble upper 
range and treble middle range to occur without loss of timbral depth or 
warmth. Turning over is accomplished by retaining depth (tube length), 
vowel shape, and relative vowel closeness—all of which maintain 
the /f_irst resonance frequency location—until the second harmonic 
has surpassed it. It is accompanied by some degree of passive vowel 
modi/f_ication or migration, a change in the vowel quality that is the 
result of maintaining the tube shape while the pitch and its harmonics 
move, in contrast to active modi/f_ication, which involves a deliberate 
shape change with a resultant retuning of resonances and resultant 
formants.
Whoop Coupling
When the fundamental frequency: 1fo (equivalent to the pitch one 
is singing) reaches the frequency of the /f_irst resonance, fR1, there is a 
strong fR1:1fo coupling. !is is called whooping 2 or hooting (D. Miller) 
and is characterized by a “hootier” full, round, deep timbre. Whoop 
timbre is dominated by the fundamental frequency; therefore, while 
resonant, it is smoother and less brassy than open timbre. It may seem 
more centralized in the head and darkly frontal, being dominated by 
the [~u, ~o, ~ɔ]-like tone color of the /f_irst harmonic boosted by the /f_irst 
resonance.
PRAA.indb   47PRAA.indb   47 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  48
Whoop Characteristics
Whooping is accomplished by tuning 
the first resonance to the 1fo, that is, 
to the pitch being sung. It is falsetto 
(CT) or mechanism two  dominant, 
tends toward flow phonation, 
facilitates laryngopharyngeal space, 
and a convergent (open to the back, 
narrower to the front) resonator shape. 
It is primarily done on close vowels, 
especially [u], because their low first 
resonance frequency locations facilitate 
fR1:1fo coupling (it is difficult for most 
non-treble voices to whoop on open 
vowels unless very high). Since treble 
voices eventually sing pitches at or 
above the first formants of all of their 
vowels, they are often operating in 
whoop mode, especially in Western classical singing ( Figure 6.2 ). 
Figure 6.2  The fR1:1fo coupling of whoop timbre, very characteristic of 
treble voice classical singing.
PRAA.indb   48PRAA.indb   48 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
 Harmonic:Resonance Interactions 49
Yell and Whoop Frequency
!ese two resonance strategies are inherently strong acoustically and 
seem to occur innately and universally among humans. For example, 
when desiring to make a lot of sound at sporting events or enthusiastic 
celebrations, humans either yell or whoop. If done to excess, either can 
cause hyper-functional wear. However, whooping is the lower pressure, 
lower risk, vocally healthier of the two options. Cultural acceptability 
is another matter. “Bravo!” in whoop mode is not likely to catch on. 
Either strategy can be skillfully adapted for aesthetic, artistic use, taking 
advantage of their expressive associations “in the wild. ”
Turning Over
!e most prominent and pedagogically relevant of these various 
harmonic:resonance interactions for non-treble voices is the crossing 
of the second harmonic (2 fo) above the /f_irst resonance (fR1). !is is the 
primary acoustic register transition of biological male voices, and at least 
for the open vowels, has been referred to as vocal cover, closing, or turning 
over. It is associated with the laryngeal shi/f_t from what has historically been 
called chest to head voice (actually chest to middle/mixed registration, i.e., 
a lighter version of laryngeal mechanism one) (Figure 6.3). As mentioned 
before, this transition also generates a timbral shi/f_t that could be described 
Figure 6.3 Power spectrum of turning over in which the second harmonic 
(2fo) has just surpassed the ﬁrst resonance peak.
PRAA.indb   49PRAA.indb   49 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  50
as passive vowel modi/f_ication or migration,  since it causes a subtle closure 
and rounding of the vowel timbre. !is modi/f_ication is accomplished not 
through a shape change, but through changing relationships between 
moving source harmonics and stable vocal tract resonances.
The Pitch of Turning
!e pitch of turning  from open to close timbre is determined by the 
location of the /f_irst resonance of the vowel being sung, which is aﬀected by 
how openly or closely the vowel is being pronounced. !e pitch of turning 
is slightly less than an octave below the /f_irst resonance of the vowel, since 
1fo is an octave below 2 fo. !at is, when you are singing a given pitch, 
its second harmonic is an octave higher. Tones sung below the pitch of 
turning for a given vowel (an octave or more below the /f_irst resonance of 
that vowel) will be in open timbre. Notes above the pitch of turning for 
that vowel (less than an octave below the /f_irst resonance of that vowel) will 
be in close timbre. If turning over were the result of laryngeal registration 
events rather than /f_irst resonance locations, one would expect a voice to 
turn over at the same pitch for all vowels. It does not. Maintaining that 
view is no longer a viable pedagogic position (Figure 6.4). 
Figure 6.4  Approximate ﬁrst formant locations of the cardinal vowels 
(modeled on the staff in a musician user-friendly way) for a bass voice. 
Each vowel formant (containing its IPA symbol) is placed in a box on the 
treble clef, with the pitches at which the voice would turn over or close 
notated on the bass clef below each vowel. Note again the overall contour 
of the set of vowel formants. This can be adjusted up or down for other 
voice categories. From highest to lowest voice category, formant locations 
only vary by about a fourth or ﬁfth with average high soprano formants 
spanning approximately G4-G5 and deep bass formants approximately 
C4-C5 (see Appendix 2, p. 179).
PRAA.indb   50PRAA.indb   50 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
 Harmonic:Resonance Interactions 51
As mentioned above,  open vowels (like [ ɑ]) have high first 
formants. Close vowels (like [i] or [u]) have low first formants. The 
more openly you pronounce a vowel, the higher its first resonance 
will be, and the higher it will turn over. The more closely you 
pronounce a vowel, the lower its first resonance will be, and the lower 
it will turn over. The ability to hear the turning of the voice, knowledge 
and anticipation of the locations and sounds of turning, and the 
willingness and ability to allow that timbral shift to occur, all are 
extremely helpful in training non-treble voice upper passaggio  and 
treble voice lower passaggio .
Madde Exploration 4: Open and Close Timbre
From Turning to Whoop
!ere is an octave between the /f_irst and second harmonics of a sung 
pitch. !erefore, if tube length and shape are kept constant—in other 
words, if the frequency location of the /f_irst vocal tract resonance is kept 
constant—there will be just under an octave between turning over into 
close timbre, where the second harmonic rises above the /f_irst resonance, 
and arrival at full whoop timbre, where the /f_irst harmonic matches the 
/f_irst resonance. An acoustic challenge is posed by the octave separation 
between the /f_irst and second harmonics: immediately above the turn, 
where the second harmonic begins to drop in power as it relinquishes 
the advantage of fR1 resonation, the /f_irst harmonic is still too far below 
the /f_irst resonance to match the power the second harmonic  just lost. 
!is loss in power can be exacerbated—especially in treble voices—by 
an earlier shi/f_t in laryngeal registration toward vibrational mechanism 
two, with its greater CT (head voice) dominance, weaker glottal 
resistance, and steeper roll-oﬀ in intensity of upper partials. To address 
this challenge various strategies can be used to strengthen glottal closure 
competence across the laryngeal register transition, and/or to boost 
overall resonance by shi/f_ting to a second resonance ampli/f_ication of a 
higher harmonic.
PRAA.indb   51PRAA.indb   51 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  52
Resonance Strategies between 
Turning and Whoop
!ere are three basic /f_irst resonance options in this transitional range:

1) active vowel modi/f_ication that lowers the /f_irst resonance to 
   precipitate whoop timbre sooner;
2) maintaining tube shape and /f_irst resonance tuning, allowing a 
   gradual migration into whoop timbre across the octave divide; and
3) active vowel modi/f_ication that raises the /f_irst resonance to 
   postpone or avoid whoop timbre.
   Overlapping with these /f_irst resonance strategies in this transitional register 
   from turning to whoop are second resonance strategies: it is precisely here 
   that coupling the second vocal tract resonance with a higher harmonic is 
   o/f_ten sought to maintain or boost intensity.
   Lowering the First Resonance 
   through Active Vowel 
   Modiﬁcation
   If a closer vowel, a closer pronunciation of the same vowel, or some 
   other tube shape adjusting, timbral deepening strategy (such as tube 
   lengthening) is used that maximizes resonator convergence for the vowel 
   being sung, the /f_irst resonance will be lowered. !is will cause a lower 
   pitch transition into full whoop timbre (an earlier fR1:1fo match). In other 
   words, it will reduce the interval between turning and whooping to rather 
   less than an octave. !is is a common strategy of treble voices (altos, 
   mezzos, sopranos, and countertenors) in Western classical singing, where 
   the opulent, smoother head voice of whoop timbre is desirable throughout 
   most of the range.
   PRAA.indb   52PRAA.indb   52 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
   Harmonic:Resonance Interactions 53
   Maintaining Vocal Tract Shape
   Maintaining vocal tract length and vowel closeness (and thus /f_irst 
   resonance frequency location) when ascending above a vowel’s point 
   of turning will result in a gradually closer, headier timbre until full 
   whoop timbre is achieved about an octave higher. As the fundamental 
   frequency (1 fo) ascends into the peak of the /f_irst resonance and begins 
   to dominate the timbre, tonal sensations may seem increasingly internal 
   and centralized, since whooping is generally felt in the head and vertical 
   pharyngeal column. However, in the lower range of this acoustic register, 
   overall intensity may need assistance from the second formant featuring a 
   higher harmonic or from a clustering of the /f_irst and second resonances, 
   amplifying the second harmonic that lies between them. If appropriate for 
   the voice type and musical style, intensity may also be helped by retaining 
   a more robust (mechanism one, “chestier”) laryngeal registration above 
   the turn or other source or resonance strategies that achieve a longer 
   closed phase of the vocal fold oscillation. !e longer the vocal fold closure 
   during each oscillation, the more, higher partials there will be in the 
   radiated tone.
   Raising the First Resonance 
   through Vowel Opening
   Alternatively, once the voice has turned over into close timbre, the vowel 
   shape can be gradually opened, starting a step or two above the point of 
   turning while staying within close timbre. !is strategy will postpone 
   arrival in full whoop timbre and retain a turned over, yet more robust, 
   buzzier timbral mix. It involves raising the /f_irst resonance by opening 
   the vowel shape in a manner that keeps fR1 positioned well above the 
   pitch being sung, avoiding full whoop timbre, but still below the second 
   harmonic, avoiding reverting to open or yell timbre. !is approach 
   eﬀectively lengthens the pitch interval between turning over and whoop 
   timbre to more than an octave, in some cases avoiding arrival into whoop 
   PRAA.indb   53PRAA.indb   53 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  54
   coupling altogether. As the vowel is opened to raise the /f_irst resonance, 
   it will be important for Western classical timbre that tube length—and 
   timbral depth—not be compromised by larynx raising. Tube shortening is 
   a viable alternative for some CCM genres that do not similarly prioritize 
   timbral depth.
   As mentioned above, in Western classical singing, trained treble voices 
   prefer the /f_irst two strategies, leaving vowels close or even closing them 
   more in order to sound headier and fuller—to reach full whoop timbre—
   lower in the range. Non-treble voices tend to prefer the third strategy, 
   opening the vowel somewhat above its point of turning, especially on 
   close vowels, in order not to proceed into falsetto/whoop timbre. Many 
   premier non-treble singers also seek out second resonance:higher 
   harmonic couplings to boost the virile ring of the voice for more exciting, 
   professional operatic top notes. A version of this strategy is also used in 
   belt mix to extend its characteristic timbre above ca. B4.
   Second Formant Strategies 
   Revisited
   As just mentioned, it is in the range between turning over and arriving 
   at whoop timbre—for open vowels, approximately the pitch range of the 
   treble clef—that strategies involving a more prominent second formant 
   are employed by many professional singers, especially non-treble singers. 
   !is is most likely due to the large intervallic distance between the /f_irst 
   and second source harmonics, as compared to the relatively smaller 
   distances between higher harmonics and their “trailing” harmonics. For 
   example, when the third harmonic surpasses the /f_irst resonance, the 
   second harmonic is less than a perfect /f_i/f_th behind and already su#ciently 
   within the bandwidth of the /f_irst resonance to be ampli/f_ied by it. However, 
   when the second harmonic crosses through the /f_irst resonance, the /f_irst 
   harmonic is almost an octave below. !e resultant loss of power can be 
   countered if a higher harmonic is within the bandwidth of the second 
   resonance. As Donald Miller has pointed out, for front vowels which have 
   a high second formant frequency center, this is likely to be the fourth 
   PRAA.indb   54PRAA.indb   54 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
   Harmonic:Resonance Interactions 55
   or higher harmonic. With the back vowels, which have a low second 
   formant, this is likely to be the third or even the second harmonic. !is 
   seems to be a feature of many premier tenors, generating an especially 
   ringing top range and of treble belters to extend belt into a bright belt 
   mix. Others maintain a stronger singer’s formant cluster to achieve ring. 
   Similar strategies in treble voice singers can be appropriate for the lower-
   middle voice, but for the upper middle voice can cause an overly brilliant 
   sound and a reluctance to relinquish the second resonance dominance 
   in order to establish the /f_irst resonance: /f_irst harmonic dominance of full 
   whoop timbre. Whoop timbre is essential to opulent operatic head voice 
   for pitches nearing the top of the treble clef and above. In any case, in order 
   to have the fullness and depth necessary for classical timbral balance, once 
   the second harmonic has surpassed the /f_irst resonance, the /f_irst harmonic 
   (1fo) will need to be resonated to some su#cient extent.
   First Resonance Tracking of 
   the First Harmonic ( fR1:1fo )
   Normally a classical genre singer would not want to sing a pitch higher 
   than the tuning of the /f_irst resonance, since the tone would lack depth 
   and fullness. !erefore, when a pitch is sung above the normal location 
   of a vowel’s /f_irst formant, the vowel would be actively modi/f_ied to raise 
   the /f_irst resonance and its formant in tandem with the rising pitch in 
   order to maintain full whoop timbre. !ere are two ways to raise the /f_irst 
   formant: tube shortening and vowel opening. Vowel opening is the better 
   option for classical timbre. Opening a vowel involves increasing its overall 
   shape divergence, while trying to preserve something of its characteristic 
   shape relative to other vowels. For example, if it is a tongue-fronted 
   vowel (tongue dorsum humped near the front teeth rather than &at), 
   tongue height and dorsum-palatal-narrowing will be preserved, even if 
   somewhat less frontally, as the vowel and mouth are opened and the head 
   posture slightly elevated. !e higher the pitch being sung, the subtler any 
   vowel distinctions become, but some thought/intention of the intended 
   vowel can assist intelligibility remarkably high in the singing range. If it 
   is a lip-rounded vowel within speaking range, some hint of lip rounding 
   PRAA.indb   55PRAA.indb   55 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  56
   remains above speaking range as the mouth is increasingly opened—as 
   compared to a non-lip rounded vowel—until quite high. Tube shortening 
   raises all formants and therefore changes timbral Fach perception. It 
   should generally be avoided in classical genre except for the extreme high 
   range of non-treble voices (ca. B5 and above). By that pitch, the ability 
   to raise the /f_irst formant by vowel opening alone has been exhausted, so 
   that elevating the larynx is the only remaining means of raising F1. At 
   that point, laryngeal elevation does not necessarily compromise vocal 
   freedom, since tuning the /f_irst resonance to the /f_irst harmonic provides 
   bene/f_icial interactive feedback to the vibrator, reducing the amount of 
   glottal resistance necessary. Besides, the vocal Fach of singers attempting 
   such stratospheric frequencies is rarely in question. Such vowel opening 
   for whoop timbre tuning is used by non-treble singers only for the vowels 
   whose /f_irst formants lie within their singing range, such as [i], [u], and 
   [y]. As mentioned above, trained non-treble voice singers tend to avoid 
   whoop timbre altogether by keeping the /f_irst formant above the pitch they 
   are singing through vowel opening, unless they are seeking a pure head 
   tone or falsetto timbre for occasional special eﬀect. But untrained or less 
   skillful ones o/f_ten neglect to open su#ciently when singing above the /f_irst 
   formant locations (ca. D4 to G4) of their close vowels ([i u y]) resulting in 
   timbral thinness and more eﬀortful phonation.
   Untrained non-treble singers also o/f_ten raise the larynx on close 
   vowels such as [i] and [u] even a/f_ter those vowels have closed, that is, 
   within the octave below the vowel’s /f_irst formant. In this case they are 
   attempting to stay in a more robust laryngeal adjustment without 
   opening the articulation of the vowel when singing pitches that approach 
   its /f_irst resonance. Maintaining a low larynx and close pronunciation in 
   that situation would normally result in the timbre becoming increasingly 
   “heady. ” Raising the larynx to avoid that whoop timbre causes a shallower 
   timbre and pressed or constricted phonation. Opening the vowel shape 
   within close timbre by opening the mouth while maintaining a relaxed 
   and settled larynx and a high dorsum-palatal narrowing between the 
   back upper molars will facilitate robust timbre and postpone or avoid 
   whoop timbre. Classical treble voices (countertenors, mezzos, and 
   sopranos alike) all will need to use the same resonance tuning strategies 
   (see Chapter 7).
   PRAA.indb   56PRAA.indb   56 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
   Harmonic:Resonance Interactions 57
   Notes
   1 !e term voce chiusa is used by some to denote the generally convergent 
   resonance strategy that results in chiaroscuro timbre and singer’s formant 
   cluster, and voce aperta to denote a generally divergent resonance 
   strategy.
   2 !e term “whoop” was chosen both as an onomatopoeic description and 
   as an equivalently vernacular contrast to the term “yell, ” in the hope that 
   its quality would be as well-known and recognizable.
   PRAA.indb   57PRAA.indb   57 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
   PRAA.indb   58PRAA.indb   58 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics
   7
   Treble Voice 
   Resonance Strategies
   Treble voices (altos, mezzos, countertenors, sopranos), whose ranges lie 
   primarily in the treble clef, face diﬀerent laryngeal registration issues 
   and resonance:harmonic circumstances than non-treble voices. Where 
   lower voices stay primarily to exclusively in vibrational mechanism one, 
   with its thicker vocal fold shape and larger vertical phase diﬀerence, 
   treble voices in Western classical singing transition from mechanism 
   one, involving TA muscle oscillation, into vibrational mechanism two, 
   with its thin, stretched vocal fold shape, increasingly involving only vocal 
   ligament vibration, in their lower-middle range. A third vibrational 
   mechanism—whistle register, with stiﬀ vocal folds that typically do 
   not fully close, eventually involving epithelial vibration above E6 (Titze 
   2025)—is used for extremely high pitches, above ca. C6. Secondly, since 
   treble ranges are about an octave higher than non-treble ranges, treble 
   voices have half as many harmonics within keyboard range available 
   for resonation. (!is can be dramatically demonstrated on the Madde 
   synthesizer: see Madde Exploration 2, p. 17.) For this reason, tuning the 
   /f_irst resonance to available harmonics is much more crucial for treble 
   singers; the higher the pitch, the more relevant the principle. !irdly, with 
   vocal tracts that are on average 20 percent shorter than male sex vocal 
   tracts, most female sex singers have fewer formants within keyboard 
   range—o/f_ten only three—from which to form their primary timbre. 
   !at nonetheless still covers the necessary bases of vowel formants 
   (resonances one and two) and a possible singer’s formant (resonance 
   three). Once a singer is above ca. C5, the singer’s formant is of decreasing 
   importance to overall resonance and projection, since the fundamental 
   PRAA.indb   59PRAA.indb   59 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  60
   Treble Voice Resonance Strategies
   frequency becomes the dominant harmonic and is high enough in 
   frequency to generate the necessary loudness level. Finally, since /f_irst 
   formants lie in contact with the treble clef, treble voices face the need 
   to resort to the /f_irst resonance tracking of the fundamental (by vowel 
   opening as described above) relatively earlier in their range than non-
   treble voices, from ca. G4-G5. In other words, as soon as a singer reaches 
   the pitch of the /f_irst resonance of a vowel, they will need to gradually 
   open that vowel for higher pitches. 1 Furthermore, some classical treble 
   singers will even close vowels somewhat, lowering the /f_irst resonance in 
   order to track the fundamental for a headier timbre lower in their range. 
   Western classical treble singing is therefore done in whoop mode a high 
   percentage of the time. !is active vowel modi/f_ication will necessarily 
   reduce the diﬀerences between vowels as they all approach the formant 
   tuning of an [ ɑ] above the treble clef, medializing and to some extent 
   neutralizing vowel timbre. Nonetheless, with su#cient textual and 
   consonantal context, plus a continued clear conception of the intended 
   vowel, some vowel diﬀerentiation and perceived intelligibility are 
   possible surprisingly high in the range.
   Middle Voice Challenge of Open 
   Vowels
   Treble voice singers generally prefer close vowels, especially close front 
   vowels, like [i] and [e], in the lower-middle voice. !is is due to the fact 
   that the /f_irst formants of those vowels lie low enough in the treble clef to 
   eﬀectively resonate the fundamental frequency of pitches in that range. 
   !e /f_irst formant of [ɑ], on the other hand, is at the top of the treble clef 
   for sopranos, so that, once mechanism one is relinquished, an [ ɑ] in the 
   lower-middle voice may weaken signi/f_icantly. Various strategies can be 
   used to strengthen this part of the range:
   z strengthening vocal fold closure through exercising mechanism 
   one. (!e vocal fold body is comprised primarily of the “chest voice” 
   muscles; exercising mechanism one—in appropriate ways—creates 
   more robust vocal fold involvement and/or increases comfortable, 
   responsive access to them.);
   PRAA.indb   60PRAA.indb   60 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
   Treble Voice Resonance Strategies 61
   z /f_inding a more complete glottal closure through the use of aﬀect, 
   greater vocal tract poise, deliberate linear phrasal continuity and 
   motivation, creaky and/or pharyngeal voice exercises, and so on;
   z /f_inding an intermediate, more gradated vocal fold thickness (While 
   a binary shi/f_t in vibrational mechanism may still occur at some 
   point, the shi/f_t needn’t be completely polarized or radical in vocal 
   fold shape change. Disciplined eﬀort should be given to smoothing 
   the transition as much as possible.); deepening or modifying the [ɑ] 
   toward [ʌ] or [ʊ] via tongue dorsum height to bring its /f_irst formant 
   closer to the pitch being sung, while maintaining inner height in 
   back;
   z /f_inding a second formant resonation of a higher harmonic 2fo or 3fo;
   z modifying to a vowel that clusters F1 and F2 enough to resonate the 
   second harmonic that lies between them;
   z shaping the resonator more convergently/closely. 2 !e more 
   convergently the [ɑ] can be conceived—using tongue dorsum height 
   and less mouth opening—the more the vocal tract resonance will 
   interactively assist vibrator e#ciency.
   Upper Middle Voice
   When better function is achieved in the upper middle voice, sopranos 
   o/f_ten report a taller, slenderer acoustic sensation of the tone, whose “dome” 
   is “behind the eyes, ” rather than the wider, shorter, lateral, “mouthy” 
   sensation of a “spread” tone. Sensation can be paradoxical. A semi-fronted, 
   elevated tongue dorsum, moderately close, convergent vowel posture, 
   amused aﬀect, and so/f_t palate that feels li/f_ted rather toward its front near 
   the hard palate, as if there is a vertical square mid-mouth between the back 
   molars, all achieve a su#ciently open throat, even though one has little 
   awareness of the throat with this set of actions. Kinesthesia for throat space 
   is notoriously false. (See Open !roat and Noiseless Inhalation, p. 99.)  
   !ese strategies appear to help establish the whoop timbre necessary for 
   the upper voice as the treble voices sing through the upper half of the 
   treble clef into their top register. Some teachers recommend assisting this 
   narrowing sensation with actual lip rounding on non-lip rounded vowels, 
   though if the internal strategies listed above are done su#ciently, the 
   PRAA.indb   61PRAA.indb   61 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  62
   external appearance of the vowel needn’t be falsi/f_ied. As the sung pitch 
   rises into the /f_irst resonance of the vowel being sung, the vowel color 
   will have maximally migrated toward its warmer, rounder /f_irst formant 
   spectral tone color. Treble voice singers o/f_ten have to be encouraged to 
   allow this timbral migration. It is a rather parallel percept to the vowel 
   migration of non-treble voices an octave lower entering the turn (cover) 
   of their vowels and even of treble voices at those pitches in what is their 
   lower passaggio.
   Whoop Timbre and Beyond
   Once a treble voice has tracked 1 fo with the /f_irst resonance as high as 
   possible through vowel opening (to ca. Bb5), they will need to raise their 
   larynx to some degree for higher pitches to continue tracking the sung 
   pitch. When the /f_irst resonance can be raised no further, the acoustic 
   register makes a transition into whistle register ( mechanism three ) in 
   which the /f_irst and second resonances might possibly be brought close 
   enough together so that the fundamental frequency (sung pitch) can be 
   resonated between them by their clustered bandwidths, or in which the 
   second resonance takes over. Ian Howell’s research on spectral tone color 
   provides the most apt explanation to date of the distinct vowel qualities 
   that can be heard pitch by pitch in these stratospheric resonance tunings. 
   !ey are typically perceived as bright variants of mid to open vowels [ ɔ 
   ɑ a æ], whose spectral tone colors reside in the frequency range of G5 to 
   G6. In some cases, an extremely high pitch may be being resonated by the 
   second resonance.
   Madde Exploration 5: Whoop Timbre and Beyond
   Examples of fR1:1fo Tracking
   In the recording of Richard Strauss’ “Beim Schlafengehen” sung by 
   soprano Leontyne Price (See Appendix 5: Y ouTube Examples: Example 1, 
   PRAA.indb   62PRAA.indb   62 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
   Treble Voice Resonance Strategies 63
   p. 183) there are several excellent examples of the /f_irst resonance tracking 
   the fundamental frequency of mid-close vowels (Figure 7.1). !e melisma 
   on the word “sehnliches” demonstrates tracking in a close [e] vowel 
   (10:01). Notice how the singer opens the vowel to keep the /f_irst  resonance 
   close to the pitch being sung. !en the [ ɪ] vowel in “Kind” at 10:22 is 
   also actively opened/modi/f_ied to maintain whoop timbre. In both cases, 
   the opening of the vowel is su#cient to keep the fundamental within the 
   eﬀective bandwidth of the /f_irst resonance for fullness and roundness of 
   tone quality (Figure 7.2). 
   A more dramatic example of maintaining whoop timbre by tracking 
   the fundamental is at 12:08–12:19 on the [e] of the word “Seele” 
   (Figure 7.3 ): 
   Figure 7 .1 fR1 tracking of 1fo in “sehnliches”: whoop timbre [e].
   Figure 7 .2 fR1 tracking of 1fo in “Kind”: whoop timbre [ɪ].
   Figure 7 .3 fR1 tracking of 1fo in “Seele”: whoop timbre [e].
   PRAA.indb   63PRAA.indb   63 7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM7/10/2025   4:38:51 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  64
   Finally, at 12:39–12:52 the close vowels [y] and [e] in “Fl ügen” and 
   “schweben” are opened signi/f_icantly in order to track the resonance of a 
   /f_irst resonance:fundamental frequency match (Figure 7.4). 
   Notes
   1 If a so/f_t, silvery, less warm high &oat is desired, the singer can stay in 
   closer articulation, allowing 1fo (the pitch being sung) to rise above F1 
   (avoiding whoop tracking). However, if this is done at loud dynamic 
   levels, the tone will be shrill.
   2 In general, having treble voices stay in close articulatory positions 
   through the middle voice for all vowels whose F1 locations are higher 
   improves convergence and resonance balance, if there is su#cient 
   internal space and an unconstricted throat.
   Figure 7 .4 F1 tracking of 1fo in “Flügen” and “schweben”: whoop timbre 
   [y] and [e].
   PRAA.indb   64PRAA.indb   64 7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics
   8
   Lower Passaggio Training
   !e pitches between the clefs, ca. Bb3 to F4, span an area in which both 
   signi/f_icant laryngeal and acoustic register transitions occur in all voice 
   types: laryngeal registration either migrates from mechanism one to 
   mechanism two or at least to a lighter version of mechanism one; vowels 
   have multiple acoustic register transitions there, including most transitions 
   from open timbre ( voce aperta) to close timbre ( voce chiusa). !is range 
   area constitutes the upper passaggio1 of non-treble voices and the lower 
   passaggio of treble voices. !e acoustic strategies suggested here—timbral 
   and somatosensory migrations and register transitions—therefore are 
   parallel and adaptable for both voice types.
   To review brie&y, a relatively stable tube (vocal tract) length is necessary 
   for consistent depth and balance of timbre in Western classical singing. 
   Both tube length and cross-sectional area are responsible for resonance 
   locations. Eﬀective tube length determines the general location of the 
   entire formant set of a given voice, including the Fach speci/f_ic singer’s 
   formant cluster. However, untrained singers instinctively shorten the vocal 
   tract upon ascending, raising the /f_irst formant in order to preserve the 
   open-timbred sound and somatosense of speech or, upon ascending into 
   the treble clef, the strong fR1:2fo acoustic coupling of the yell, a behavior that 
   appears to be a universal, hardwired survival trait. Y elling results in an 
   increasingly pressed mode of phonation, a heavier (thyroarytenoid [TA] 
   dominant) laryngeal registration adjustment, and inconsistency of timbre 
   and perceived Fach. If vocal tract length and shape are kept stable, /f_irst 
   formant locations will remain stable and the yell will be avoided by allowing 
   2fo to pass through and above fR1. !is transition results in the timbral shi/f_t  
   variously referred to as “closing, ” “covering, ” or “turning over, ” and facilitates 
   an easier laryngeal registration adjustment—either to a lighter “mix” form 
   PRAA.indb   65PRAA.indb   65 7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  66
   Figure 8.1 The thyrohyoid space.
   Lower Passaggio Training
   of mechanism one or a complete transition into mechanism two—and a 
   less pressed mode of phonation. Knowledge of the variety of F1 locations 
   by vowel and their predictable fR1:2fo crossings when singing an octave 
   lower, as well as the passive vowel migrations that accompany those 
   crossings, becomes both an accurate means of assessing tube length 
   stability and a reliable basis for developing eﬀective strategies for training 
   tube stability for successful passaggio negotiation.
   Lower Passaggio Objectives
   !e main technical objectives in training this voice transition into the 
   treble middle voice or non-treble upper voice are as follows.
   A Stable Laryngeal Position and Tube 
   Length and a Convergent Resonator
   A relatively stable laryngeal 
   position, tube length, and 
   convergent resonator shape 
   ensures depth and consistency 
   of timbre. A stable tube 
   length is accomplished by 
   avoiding activation of the 
   swallowing muscles that raise 
   the larynx and constrict the 
   laryngopharynx. !is can be 
   monitored in some bodies by 
   palpating the thyrohyoid space 
   toward the back of the larynx 
   on either side. (See Figure 8.1  
   and Monitoring Tube Length 
   Stability, p. 101.) Although some 
   speci/f_ic narrowings within the 
   larynx facilitate e#ciency, the thyrohyoid space can remain relatively 
   uncompressed and open. Muscularly /f_ixing the larynx in a low position 
   PRAA.indb   66PRAA.indb   66 7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM
   Lower Passaggio Training 67
   will interfere with vocal freedom. Maintaining timbral depth and 
   degree of vowel closeness until a/f_ter the vowel has turned over assists 
   in discouraging laryngeal elevation upon pitch ascent. A convergent 
   resonator shape—more open near the larynx and closer, either at the 
   dorsum:palatal narrowing or near the lips—facilitates the development 
   of the singer’s formant cluster and chiaroscuro, balanced resonance. It 
   requires some degree of tongue dorsum height, elevation of the so/f_t  
   palate, a shortened front-to-back distance percept, and the least degree 
   of jaw drop necessary for the vowel/pitch combination being sung. For 
   relatively open vowels it should seem to the singer that inner height 
   “leads” and jaw opening follows, rather than vice versa.
   Dynamic Laryngeal Registration
   A dynamic laryngeal registration  with smooth, gradual changes ensures 
   ease and dynamic &exibility. While using appropriate resonance strategies 
   usually improves laryngeal registration, it does not guarantee eﬀective 
   muscular adjustments. Dynamic (ever-changing) laryngeal registration 
   appropriate to pitch requires some separate attention. Expression of 
   feeling aﬀords the most immediate, nuanced access to and control of 
   laryngeal registration. However, knowledge of the eﬀects of vowel on 
   resonance and registration can inform creative exercise strategies and 
   therapies. For example, smoothly gliding from a chesty open vowel 
   to a heady close vowel an octave higher can give laryngeal muscles an 
   opportunity to discover dynamic adjustments. Singing scalar passages in 
   which deliberate, successively smoother timbre and closer vowel choices 
   coincide with ascending pitch can also coax laryngeal registration toward 
   a lighter adjustment, and vice versa (buzzier and more open-timbred) for 
   descent. While changes in the percentages of the TA and CT involvement 
   may be trained to be fairly gradual, acoustic feedback factors will likely 
   precipitate a binary shi/f_t from vibrational mechanism one (short, thick 
   folds, loose cover, vocalis muscle oscillation) to mechanism two (long, 
   taut, thin folds, taut cover, vocal ligament oscillation) at some point in the 
   scale, though skillful singers are able to minimize the timbral eﬀect of this 
   shi/f_t. Non-treble voices resort to laryngeal mechanism two infrequently, 
   but do need lighter adjustments of mechanism one for the upper range.
   PRAA.indb   67PRAA.indb   67 7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  68
   Familiarity with Vowel Turning
   A familiarity with the locations, sounds, and sensations of vowel turning 
   is necessary. Since letting the voice turn over—rather than yelling—is 
   not instinctive, knowing when and where to expect vowels to turn over 
   can be very helpful to the young singer. If vowels do not turn over where 
   expected, one of two things has happened to keep the /f_irst formant 
   above the second harmonic: the vowel has been opened (a sometimes 
   reasonable but pitch- and diction-limited strategy) or the larynx has been 
   raised (rarely a good strategy in classical genre), or most likely, both. 
   Experiencing vowel turning on the close vowels [i] and [u], which close 
   well below the traditional lower passaggio location, can be instructive. 
   Close [o] and [e] turn at about the traditionally understood location of the 
   primo passaggio, at the low end of the zona di passaggio. !eir depth and 
   closeness are relatively easy to monitor and coach. An untrained singer 
   will tend to open [o] toward [ ʌ] and [e] toward [ ɛ] rather than allowing 
   the turn. Resonant, in&ective speech sounds that loop above, gliding up 
   and over the predicted pitch of turning and ease back down through it are 
   easy initial ways to explore vowel turning. If the yell instinct is stubborn, 
   suggesting depth, thinking a slightly closer vowel and an internalizing 
   aﬀect or direction (sobby; in, down and out) while ascending, are o/f_ten 
   fruitful strategies. Avoiding chin tuck, and instead, allowing the head to 
   tip slightly back and up as the warmer, darker “ under-vowel” tone color 
   tips up and forward above the palate and the tongue dorsum rises toward 
   the TMJ facilitates the turn as well. !e eventual actual goal is to maintain 
   rather than change tube shape while looping up, allowing the acoustic, 
   smooth yet almost binary somatosensory “&ip” of passive migration that 
   occurs with turning.
   The Ability to Turn Over
   Once a student is familiar with the sounds and sensations of turning, 
   and knows when and where vowels should turn over, the ability to allow 
   vowels to turn over at appropriate pitches should be rehearsed until 
   routinely automated and non-manipulative. If the best resonance tuning 
   is being maintained, an expressively motivated in&ective loop up and 
   down on any vowel will turn over and back with consistent chiaroscuro 
   PRAA.indb   68PRAA.indb   68 7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM
   Lower Passaggio Training 69
   timbre, ease, and without a signi/f_icant, inevitable crescendo toward the 
   crest of the loop. !ere may also be a sense of the tone settling in an inner 
   direction both above the palate and below the larynx with the upward 
   pitch in&ection and turn, and back toward the mid-mouth and the hard 
   palate when reopening upon descent.
   Vowel Integrity with Appropriate Vowel 
   Migration
   !e passive vowel migration that accompanies vowel turning should not 
   distort vowels, rather should be in the same natural vowel family, on the 
   same side of the “front-back” street, and not interfere with intelligibility. 
   Speci/f_ically, modi/f_ications on the “back vowel” side of the street—[ɑ ɔ ʊ 
   o]—will move in the direction of a closer neighbor on the same side of 
   the street. Similarly vowels on the “front” side of the street—[ ɛ e ɪ]—will 
   close somewhat and slightly neutralize. Since they will already have closed 
   much lower, the close vowels [i] and [u] will need mouth and jaw opening 
   while maintaining tongue dorsum height. !e [i] can retain identity 
   rather high, since F2 tuning can be maintained via dorsum height even 
   with mouth opening. !e [u] will necessarily open toward an [ ʊ], as it 
   does in celebratory whooping. Avoiding whoop timbre by extending close 
   timbre range via vowel opening through the zona di passaggio will retain 
   the buzzier “virility” of non-treble voice resonance. However, the mixing 
   of back vowels such as [ɑ] or [ɔ] “across the street” toward [ɛ] or toward a 
   mixed vowel such as [œ] by fronting the tongue dorsum will be perceived 
   as vowel distortion (see Vowel Modi/f_ication Revisited below).
   Maintenance of Chiaroscuro Timbre
   While the upper voice of professional non-treble classical singers should 
   have an exciting, ringing quality, there should also be timbral fullness and 
   depth. !is is accomplished by maintaining tube length, an unconstricted 
   throat, and the degree of resonator convergence necessary for the depth-
   dependent singer’s formant cluster, even while the tube shape is being 
   otherwise modi/f_ied (i.e., when resonances one and two are involved in 
   some range speci/f_ic formant tuning). Treble voices transitioning into 
   PRAA.indb   69PRAA.indb   69 7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  70
   their middle range tend to migrate into laryngeal mechanism two by, 
   or early in the treble clef, causing the need to maintain su#cient glottal 
   closure competence for a robust sound. Helpful strategies include: 
   maintaining shape convergence, allowing timbral migrations with 
   su#cient complementary tone color and auditory roughness (migration 
   of buzziness), and careful, expressively motivated coup de glotte onsets.
   Vowel Modiﬁcation Revisited
   !e question of vowel modi/f_ication vs. vowel integrity  or “purity” has 
   been much debated across the history of vocal pedagogy. Both concepts 
   require yet elude clear de/f_inition, since human perception is involved. 
   Given our new understanding that, to human perception, sound is a 
   blend of inherent, frequency-dependent spectral tone colors, which 
   therefore necessarily change with every pitch change, and the fact that the 
   tone color contributions of individual frequencies increase and decrease 
   as harmonics move into and through vocal tract resonance peaks, it 
   becomes clear that vowel migration is inevitable. !e concept of vowel 
   modi/f_ication has historically ranged from conscious vocal tract shape 
   changes with the intent of producing a modi/f_ied vowel timbre to outright 
   vowel substitution. !e concept of passive vowel migration introduced 
   here points out that some degree of vowel shi/f_t will dependably, inevitably 
   occur when the vowel shaping of the vocal tract tube is kept stable while 
   the pitch (with its set of potential harmonics) is raised, as harmonics 
   change in tone color and intensity as they move through resonances. !is 
   kind of vowel change will feel to the singer like they are maintaining the 
   vowel—at least in shape—while allowing a subtle migration within the 
   same family, or on the same “side of the street” in terms of front-back 
   designation. What all teachers presumably want to avoid is the perception 
   of a vowel distortion. !is occurs when, for example, an open back vowel, 
   such as [ɔ] takes on some of the quality of a mixed vowel such as [œ]. !is 
   is more indicative of mistaken tongue shape (moving the dorsum-palatal-
   narrowing too far forward) or excess tongue tension than of the acoustics 
   of turning over, and does not result from maintaining the normal speech 
   shape of [ɔ] over the fR1:2fo crossing, which should migrate instead in the 
   direction of [ʊ].
   PRAA.indb   70PRAA.indb   70 7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM
   Lower Passaggio Training 71
   !e phenomenon of passive vowel migration invites the question of 
   what vowel modi/f_ication is or should be altogether. Is it a deliberate 
   reshaping of the resonator to that of a diﬀerent speech vowel posture in 
   the attempt to /f_ind a more favorable resonance:harmonic coupling? Or is 
   it rather a perceptual change that occurs as a result of maintaining vowel 
   shape while changing pitch, and the resultant, inherently changing 
   spectral tone colors and resonance:harmonic relationships? Or is it 
   perhaps both, depending upon the circumstance? !e answers to these 
   questions have been signi/f_icantly informed by Howell’s work on spectral 
   tone color, but could bene/f_it from further research. In terms of practice in 
   this author’s opinion, below the turn to just above it, maintaining shape 
   should prevail. Between the turn and whoop timbre, in close timbre, 
   either can be used. At fR1:1fo whoop coupling and higher, some form of 
   active shape change (vowel opening) must be used to track whoop timbre 
   and thus maintain timbral fullness, regardless of how the singer motivates 
   that shape change. Ideally a singer should be able to continue to think the 
   vowel of the word being sung, but with the addition of greater opening of 
   the mouth and mandible while allowing an increasing percentage of the 
   complementary vowel tone color. Some singers get a better result by 
   actually thinking a more open neighbor vowel (vowel substitution). 
   Subtleties of shaping will enable one to preserve the intended vowel 
   identity more or less well relative to other vowels at the same pitch. !at 
   said, if the su#ciently modi/f_ied vocal tract shape necessary for a resonant 
   but convincingly understandable [i] vowel on a tenor or treble voice C5, is 
   used on C4 an octave lower, it will not sound like a speech level [i], rather 
   it will contain excess under-vowel [ ʏ] tone color. Conversely, if a tenor 
   attempts a normal speech range [i] shape on C5, the timbre—if phonation 
   is even possible—will sound thin, strained, or strangled. Changing the 
   shape of the vocal tract in such situations (when singing above the normal 
   F1 frequency) is essential, both for balanced sound and for functional ease.
   One principle at play in all modi/f_ication has to do with the number of 
   possible harmonics that lie below the /f_irst resonance. !e lower the pitch 
   being sung, the more potential harmonics there will be below the /f_irst 
   resonance. Furthermore, when singing lower pitches, usually a higher 
   number harmonic (3 fo or higher) will be rising through the /f_irst 
   resonance, and the harmonic below it will be trailing more closely, o/f_ten 
   already well within the bandwidth (climbing the skirt) of fR1. !e trailing 
   harmonic is therefore positioned to be resonated by fR1 and thus able to 
   PRAA.indb   71PRAA.indb   71 7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  72
   assume the prominence just relinquished by its higher neighbor. With 
   multiple harmonics below the /f_irst resonance, there are also more closely 
   spaced harmonics available above the /f_irst resonance to be resonated by 
   resonances two and higher, hence little need to modify the shape for 
   better resonance:harmonic matches. !erefore, active vowel 
   modi/f_ication—beyond a generally good, convergent acoustic poise of 
   the vocal tract—should not be needed in the range where two or more 
   harmonics lie below fR1.
   Higher harmonics (with closer trailing harmonics) rising through the 
   /f_irst resonance at lower sung pitches generate audible, but subtler timbral 
   closings or turnings. However, when the second harmonic rises through 
   the /f_irst resonance, the trailing /f_irst harmonic is almost an octave below, 
   and the resultant timbral shi/f_t (not to mention the interactive feedback 
   eﬀect on the vibrator) is more signi/f_icant. Once whoop timbre is achieved, 
   that is, once 1 fo has arrived at the frequency peak of fR1, no trailing 
   harmonics remain (there are no harmonics below 1 fo—it is by de/f_inition 
   the lowest harmonic), and there are many fewer higher harmonics within 
   primary vowel tone color range (keyboard range) available for resonation. 
   !erefore, with higher pitch, formant tuning becomes increasingly 
   necessary, the higher the fundamental, the more essential and greater the 
   necessary modi/f_ication. Should the /f_irst harmonic rise above the /f_irst 
   resonance enough to fall out of its bandwidth, since there are no rising 
   harmonics below the /f_irst resonance for it to feature, the overall timbre 
   will quickly thin, and formant retuning (raising fR1 in tandem with the 
   pitch being sung) becomes essential.
   Non-Linear Source-Filter Theory 
   Revisited
   !e purpose of active vowel modi/f_ication just discussed is to adjust 
   resonances in order to /f_ind a better match with available source harmonics. 
   As mentioned rather earlier, in certain circumstances acoustic energy 
   reverberating within the vocal tract can be productively re&ected back 
   toward the vocal folds, assisting the e#ciency and power of the glottal 
   oscillation. Such interactivity can eﬀectively increase the closed quotient 
   PRAA.indb   72PRAA.indb   72 7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM
   Lower Passaggio Training 73
   (percentage of closure time in each vibrational cycle) of the vibrator. !is 
   makes the resonator more e#cient for the upper end of the spectrum: 
   the longer the closed phase , the stronger the reinforcement of higher 
   harmonics. It also reduces air&ow without the need for greater muscular 
   glottal closure force (glottal squeeze). !e circumstances in which 
   interactivity is enhanced are: some resonator convergence, a settled larynx, 
   an unconstricted throat, narrowed exit of the epilaryngeal tube, and other 
   micro-adjustments along the vocal tract. All of these conditions increase 
   acoustic inertive reactance, a factor that can improve glottal e#ciency. 
   !ese characteristics (unconstricted throat, resonator convergence) are 
   especially typical of unampli/f_ied Western classical singing in the creation 
   of its chiaroscuro (bright/dark) balanced resonance and singer’s formant 
   cluster. (Sundberg 1974; Titze and Story 1997; Titze and Verdolini 2012).
   !e in&uence of the resonator upon the vibrator had been anticipated 
   by earlier voice teacher/researchers such as Berton Co#n, Ralph 
   Appleman, and John Large, and intuited by voice teachers for centuries, 
   but the physics involved has only more recently been explained by voice 
   science researchers such as Johan Sundberg, Ingo Titze, and Donald 
   Miller. At present, non-linear interactivity as described above seems to 
   apply to vocal tract strategies (a convergent resonator) especially present 
   in unampli/f_ied Western classical singing. Other singing styles that employ 
   a more divergent oral shape access bene/f_icial interactivity via alternative 
   pharyngeal narrowing strategies that prioritize greater high-frequency 
   spectral content.
   Resonator Convergence
   Voice scientist Ingo Titze has observed that Western classical singers use a 
   vocal tract shape that is relatively convergent, as in an inverted megaphone, 
   presumably in order to maximize inertive reactance for classical resonance 
   e#ciency. As explained above, the creation of the singer’s formant cluster 
   and chiaroscuro timbre requires a relatively convergent resonator shape. 
   Close front vowels, given their tongue contact with the upper molars, 
   are inherently convergent, and also create greater pharyngeal space and 
   verticality behind the tongue’s dorsum-palatal-narrowing. Open vowels 
   PRAA.indb   73PRAA.indb   73 7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  74
   will need some adjustment to achieve maximal convergence, within the 
   limits of acceptable vowel intelligibility. For example, pronouncing open 
   vowels within speech range with the least amount of jaw drop and tongue 
   &attening—retaining as high a tongue dorsum as can be managed with good 
   diction—will increase their convergence. Convergence is also dependent 
   upon a relatively settled, neutral throat, in which the thyrohyoid space has 
   not been compressed (Figure 8.1, p. 66), and appropriate, fronted height 
   of the so/f_t palate. A convergent vocal tract poise can be more naturally 
   achieved through the use of motivational aﬀects, such as inner pleasure, 
   suppressed laugh, mischief, empathy, sobbiness, and so on, aﬀects that 
   stimulate a settled larynx, unconstricted throat, li/f_ted palate, and closer 
   vowel postures. All such adjustments should result in better chiaroscuro 
   resonance, comfortably and freely achieved.
   Vocal Cover/Turning Over
   If vowels turn over at their predicted locations—slightly less than an 
   octave below the resonant speech locations of their /f_irst formants—that 
   is evidence of tube length stability, a desirable characteristic in Western 
   classical singing. !erefore, observing the location of vowel turnings is 
   useful for assessing and training tube length stability. Raising the larynx 
   with pitch ascent—due to the yell instinct—is a remarkably strong and 
   universal response. Countering this instinct by training the larynx to &oat 
   low even when ascending, constitutes a signi/f_icant part of training singers, 
   especially non-treble singers. It is important for the teacher and singer 
   to understand, respect, and allow the necessary harmonic:resonance 
   crossings that result from a stable tube length during pitch ascent, and 
   the subtle passive vowel migrations that accompany each successive 
   timbral closing. Furthermore, understanding the relationship between 
   vowel closeness and /f_irst formant locations provides an eﬀective tool for 
   encouraging vowel turning when habit and instinct undermine tube length 
   stability and resist vowel turning. If the tube shortening/vowel opening 
   “yell” response is stubbornly persistent, deepening the timbre along with 
   some degree of vowel closing can be temporarily used to precipitate 
   turning over until the habitual response is retrained. !e degree of closure 
   PRAA.indb   74PRAA.indb   74 7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM
   Lower Passaggio Training 75
   can be accomplished by vowel choice or closeness of vowel pronunciation, 
   such as insisting on a “Minnesotan” (or German closed) [o]; moving to 
   a closer neighbor vowel: [o] to [u]; [e] to [ ɪ]; or by physical directions 
   that accomplish su#cient closeness, such as maintaining contact between 
   the tongue dorsum and molars, making sure the so/f_t palate is li/f_ted, or 
   maintaining lip or tongue shape.
   Secondary Acoustic Registration 
   Events
   As mentioned above, there are audible eﬀects whenever any harmonic 
   crosses the /f_irst resonance—closings when a harmonic rises through 
   the /f_irst resonance, and openings when a harmonic drops below the 
   /f_irst resonance. Like the primary turning of the voice when 2fo rises 
   through fR1, the locations of all other harmonic:resonance crossings are 
   predictable, and therefore pedagogically useful. !e third harmonic 
   will cross a /f_irst resonance when singing an octave and a /f_i/f_th below the 
   resonance; the fourth harmonic two octaves below, and so forth. Given 
   these larger intervallic distances below /f_irst resonance locations, the 
   resultant intersections necessarily happen more o/f_ten on low pitches and 
   on open vowels, hence more o/f_ten within the bass clef, or in non-treble 
   voices.
   Handling the Lower Zona di 
   Passaggio
   All of these crossings provide opportunities for inappropriate adjustments 
   of tube length or shape (shortening and opening). !is is more o/f_ten an 
   issue when ascending, since the /f_irst resonance tends to lock on and track 
   rising harmonics, making timbral closing less instinctive than timbral 
   opening. For example, the third harmonic crosses the /f_irst resonance of 
   the open vowels [ɛ], [ɔ], and [ɑ] just below the traditional location of the 
   PRAA.indb   75PRAA.indb   75 7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  76
   primo passaggio, generating an audible “mini-turning” or “mini-closing” 
   that is o/f_ten described as seeming acoustically “narrower, ” “taller, ” with 
   a slight increase in the vowel’s complementary tone color, and more 
   internal to the singer. If this crossing does not happen, the larynx has 
   been raised and the vowel opened, causing the zona di passaggio  to 
   sound too blatant or wide open, and setting the singer up for a more 
   di#cult transition through the secondo passaggio. !is may explain the 
   frequently encountered “hourglass” perception or description of the zona 
   di passaggio and directives to “narrow, ” “gather, ” or “collect” the voice 
   through the passaggio.
   Furthermore, the /f_irst resonances of the close vowels [i] and [u] in 
   their normal speech shapes lie in the vicinity of the secondo passaggio,  
   and pitches on those vowels would have closed acoustically an octave 
   lower, well below even the primo passaggio. Unless wanting to move into 
   whoop coupling (fR1:1fo) at the secondo passaggio, the singer will need to 
   open [i] and [u] through the zona di passaggio in order to avoid or delay 
   whoop timbre and stay in a more virile or belt-like mixed timbre. In any 
   case singers will certainly need to open [i] and [u] at the secondo 
   passaggio and above to avoid thinness of timbre and tightness of 
   phonation, since in their normal speech shapes, whoop coupling ( fR1:1fo) 
   would have been reached by then, and—if no adjustment is made—
   exceeded above it. !ough it is counterintuitive, due to their relative F1 
   locations, an [i] in the upper voice will need to be more orally open in 
   shape than an [ ɑ] at the same pitch in order to match in registrational 
   timbre.
   !ese secondary acoustic registration events create opportunities not 
   only for inappropriate adjustments, but also can be fruitfully exploited for 
   training purposes. !e primary acoustic transition of the fR1:2fo crossing of 
   the open vowels near the secondo passaggio can be reliably modeled an 
   octave lower, where 4 fo crosses f R1, or a /f_i/f_th lower where 3fo crosses fR1. 
   !ough the passive vowel migrations are subtler at these interactions, they 
   oﬀer the advantage of rehearsing acoustic transitions that parallel the 
   fR1:2fo intersection without the challenges of laryngeal registration faced at 
   that higher transition. Learning how to maintain tube shape and to allow 
   the resultant vowel migration (passive modi/f_ication) is crucial to the 
   training of Western classical singing.
   PRAA.indb   76PRAA.indb   76 7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM7/10/2025   4:38:52 PM
   Lower Passaggio Training 77
   Summary of Events Surrounding 
   the Lower Zona di Passaggio
   All of the acoustic registration events that surround the non-treble 
   passaggio can be charted on the musical staﬀ for clearer comprehension 
   (Figure 8.2): 
   Primo Passaggio
   (events that occur in the vicinity of the primo passaggio)
   z the mini-turnings (fR1:3fo crossings) of the open vowels [ɛ], [ɔ], and 
   [ɑ]
   z the primary turnings (fR1:2fo) of the semi-close vowels [e] and [o]
   Figure 8.2 The acoustic registration events that surround the passaggio 
   are charted in the bass clef between the brackets: the black pitches 
   represent the primary turning of the vowels at the fR1:2fo crossings; the 
   open vowels [ ɛ], [ ɑ], and [ ɔ] turn or close near the secondo passaggio  
   and the close vowels [e] and [o] nearer to the primo passaggio ; the 
   pitches a P5th lower represent the “mini-turnings” of the fR1:3fo crossings 
   of the open vowels [ ɛ], [ ɑ], and [ ɔ] near the primo passaggio ; and the 
   ﬁrst formant locations of [i] and [u]—also near the secondo passaggio—
   indicate the point at which whoop timbre would occur and above which 
   ﬁrst formant tracking of 1fo  would be necessary. (See Appendix 3 for 
   charts of passaggio events for all voice types, p. 181 .)
   PRAA.indb   77PRAA.indb   77 7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  78
   Secondo Passaggio
   (events that occur in the vicinity of the secondo passaggio)
   z the primary turnings (fR1:2fo) of the open vowels [ɛ], [ɔ], and [ɑ]
   z arrival in whoop timbre (fR1:1fo) of the close vowels [i]and [u]
   Registration and Expression/
   Artistry
   Along with the primary turn, these secondary timbral events are 
   not only important for elegant range negotiation, but can also be 
   exploited for artistic purposes, since their passive timbral migrations 
   are often associated with expression. A non-treble voice that “opens” 
   further upon descending through a harmonic/formant crossing can 
   sound richer and emotionally fuller. Conversely, the deepening and 
   rounding of timbre that accompanies ascending timbral closures 
   (cover) is colorful and emotionally warming and/or exciting. One 
   can actively precipitate these effects safely—when sufficiently near 
   their predictable locations—by subtle degrees of vowel opening or 
   closing. The thrill of a high note can be increased by accessing the 
   resonance boost of a second resonance:higher harmonic coupling 
   upon turning over. If a soft, sweet yet full head tone effect is sought 
   on an [i] or an [u] near the secondo passaggio , the singer can stay in 
   close pronunciation to access full “whoop” timbre, and open gradually 
   above that to continue to track 1 fo wi th fR1. These phenomena have 
   parallels in the lower passaggio  of treble voices at approximately the 
   same pitches and benefit from the same strategies. In treble voices, 
   there is a greater tendency to transition into mechanism two earlier, 
   especially in classical genres, but this can be delayed as in non-
   treble upper voices if appropriate to the genre aesthetic. See Effect of 
   Approach by Leap, p. 85, and Timbral Openings and Closings Other 
   than fR1:2fo, p. 89.
   PRAA.indb   78PRAA.indb   78 7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM
   Lower Passaggio Training 79
   Note
   1 References to passaggi, zona di passaggio, primo and secondo passaggio 
   rely upon reporting by Richard Miller on the Italian School of Singing 
   in !e Structure of Singing. For more information, see Passaggio under 
   De/f_initions, p. 163.
   PRAA.indb   79PRAA.indb   79 7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM
   PRAA.indb   80PRAA.indb   80 7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics
   9
   Perceptions of Turning Over
   !e reader may wonder, “When a voice turns over—when 2fo rises through 
   fR1—what does it sound like to the audience? And what does it sound and 
   feel like to the singer?”
   First it should be noted that this question is especially signi/f_icant for 
   non-treble voices to access their upper range, since all vowels will have 
   turned over in the octave below G4, and for deep voices as early as by D4. 
   And yet there are parallel percepts for the lower passaggio of treble voices 
   in the same range where transitioning from laryngeal mechanism one to 
   mechanism two commences—the range ca. between the bass and treble 
   clefs. Furthermore, the answer is complicated by the fact that it will vary 
   somewhat from vowel to vowel, from voice type to voice type, and from 
   whether the cause is active or passive vowel modi/f_ication. Finally, since 
   subjective, sensory perceptions are individual, predictive descriptions of 
   perception are inherently variable and therefore cannot be in&exibly 
   described. All that said, the following descriptions and pedagogic 
   opinions—based on historic pedagogic terminology descriptive of 
   procedural knowledge, personal experience, anecdote, impression, and 
   student response, though not subjected to the rigorous testing of scienti/f_ic 
   methodology—are typical and, in the author’s experience, reliably useful.
   Perception of Vowel and Timbre
   When well executed, the timbral change and passive migrations associated 
   with turning over are relatively subtle. If vowels are divided into front and 
   back “families” or sequences, [i ɪ e ɛ æ a] and [u o ʊ ɔ ɑ],1 listed from 
   PRAA.indb   81PRAA.indb   81 7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  82
   Perceptions of Turning Over
   closest to most open, then the passive migration of the vowel will be in the 
   same vowel family or sequence. !e more open, back, or rounded vowels 
   move toward a closer neighbor: [ ɔ] will migrate toward [ ʊ]; [o] toward 
   [ʊ] or [u]. !e more open front vowels close slightly and also medialize 
   or neutralize somewhat: [ɛ] will seem to migrate in the direction of [e] or 
   [ɪ] with a hint of [œ], but with no change of lip shape. Indeed, if these are 
   truly passive migrations, no shape change in the direction of those vowel 
   migrations should be made. !e original vowel and vocal tract shape 
   should be deliberately and expressively maintained through the turn. 
   In particular, while care should be taken to keep the laryngopharyngeal 
   depth factor stable (the unconstricted throat and settled larynx), aspects of 
   the vocal tract shape that are expressively toned and tuned for perceptual 
   “height” and “ring” should be emphasized to avoid excessive dulling of the 
   timbre across the turn. In this regard, active expression “tunes” the height, 
   width, and convergent angle of the tonal “ceiling” somatosense, avoiding a 
   passive, lax, internal droop. !e student may be tempted to move toward 
   excessive orality (yell response), to modify the vowel heavily (by tube 
   lengthening, active vowel substitution, or closing the vowel shape), or 
   simply to collapse the shape toward a neutral “anonymous vowel, ” all of 
   which should be avoided. When well produced, the timbral shi/f_t will feel 
   acoustic, not muscular, and even the change in acoustic sensation will be 
   subtle, not heavy.
   Perception of Tonal Sensation
   !e very term “turning over” is descriptive of the acoustic sensation. 
   !ere is a sense of the top of the tonal sensation arching, internalizing, 
   rounding, tipping or rolling up above the palate and into the head toward 
   the front, in other words, “turning over” and reverberating in the head 
   more as opposed to coming directly out of the mouth as in open timbre. 
   Care should be taken to avoid an instinctive postural chin-tucking in an 
   attempt to precipitate or assist this turning percept. At the same time, 
   there may be an oppositional sensation of the “underbelly” of the tone 
   settling through a relaxed neck into the body and rolling down and under. 
   !is latter aspect counters the reaching up and out sensation typical of the 
   throat constriction of a yell. Together these sensations might seem like the 
   PRAA.indb   82PRAA.indb   82 7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM
   Perceptions of Turning Over 83
   two ends of a scroll rolling up and over toward the front, and down and 
   under into the body. !e “back wall” of an open-throated tonal sensation 
   should neither be moved forward nor moved further back through the 
   turn. !ere is also the sense that the tone is increasingly settled and open 
   in the torso, acoustically collected, with a more concentrated sensation 
   in the oropharynx (rather than hollowed and yawny), and convergent or 
   narrowing to the front, rather than widening.
   Unless whoop timbre is desired, passive migration will not su#ce for 
   the two closest vowels, [i] and [u], which will have closed already in mid-
   bass clef, well below the lower passaggio. !ey will need to be actively 
   opened through the non-treble zona di passaggio to retain a virile quality 
   and continue to open with further ascent. In treble voices, those close 
   vowels will need to be gradually opened early in the treble clef to track 
   whoop timbre. In general, when opening a vowel, the vertical stretching of 
   its internal acoustic sensation should seem to lead the opening. !e jaw 
   opening should follow rather than lead, and feel more like settling in, 
   back, and down than like reaching out and down. While the mouth is 
   opening, though counterintuitive, the tongue dorsum should remain as 
   high as the vowel and pitch will allow to maintain the “bene/f_icial 
   narrowing” needed for the interactive acoustic feedback of convergence.
   Perception by Voice Type and 
   Vowel
   !e lighter the voice type, usually the lighter the turn and modi/f_ication 
   will sound. !e lower, heavier, or deeper the voice type, the more 
   noticeable the turn will likely sound. Leggiero tenors may have rather 
   subtle timbral shi/f_ts, while basses, deep baritones, and dramatic tenors 
   tend to have more obvious, even dramatic shi/f_ts. Since this passaggio is 
   low in treble voices and at lower pressure levels, its eﬀects are noticeable 
   but more subtle. !e turn is also more obvious on open vowels, especially 
   open back vowels such as [ ɔ] and [ɑ]. !e stronger the ring component, 
   if freely gotten and sensed high in the vertical “back room” through the 
   turn, the better the turn and the less overly “covered” the resultant tone. 
   !is may be due to a su#ciently strong singer’s formant or to an eﬀective 
   second resonance:higher harmonic coupling above the turn.
   PRAA.indb   83PRAA.indb   83 7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  84
   Di/uniFB00erence in E/uniFB00ect between Active 
   and Passive Modiﬁcation
   In scalar passages it is most elegant to accomplish a smooth, gradual turning 
   across the span of several pitches. However, the turn can be exaggerated, 
   particularly in non-treble voices, by active vowel modi/f_ication: choosing a 
   more open timbre just below the turn, then creating a deliberate, heavier 
   cover at the turn, especially if coordinated with a shi/f_t to F2 prominence on 
   a higher harmonic. Speci/f_ically, this involves initially opening the timbre, 
   postponing the turn, then subsequently lowering F1 by closing the vowel 
   shape and/or lengthening the vocal tract. Such a move will precipitate a 
   more dramatic, deliberate turn, which—if not too exaggerated—might be 
   eﬀective for strong expressive eﬀect, but should be reserved for special 
   circumstances. Multiple examples of such a use can be heard in tenor 
   Nicolai Gedda’s recording of the Rachmaninoﬀ Vocalise (See Appendix 
   5: Y ouTube Examples: Example 2). Whether or not using this strategy to 
   this extent is ideal in this song is debatable. In this recording Gedda tends 
   not to smooth the transition from open to close. Instead, he o/f_ten sings 
   deliberately open timbres just below the turn, and then overtly “hooks” 
   into the turn. For example, about three minutes into the Vocalise, Gedda 
   chooses to sing an E4 to F#4 from rather open to close timbre, then 
   immediately a/f_terwards sings the F#4 in open timbre, closing only as he 
   moves to G#4 ( Figure 9.1). A skillful singer does have some latitude in 
   having the turn occur at slightly diﬀerent pitches on the same vowel—
   within narrow pitch limits. If the pitch of turning is moved away from its 
   normal location, it is usually delayed to a higher pitch (via opening) for 
   loud dynamic levels, or done at lower pitches (via closing) as a strategy 
   to so/f_ten the dynamic. An [ɑ] vowel held in open timbre higher than its 
   normal turning location will sound a bit spread and blatant, as it does in 
   a few instances in this recording of Gedda on some open F#4’s. !at said, 
   Figure 9.1 Rachmaninoff vocalize excerpt, mm. 26–29.
   PRAA.indb   84PRAA.indb   84 7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM
   Perceptions of Turning Over 85
   Gedda’s excellent, smooth laryngeal registration shi/f_t to mechanism two 
   in the /f_inal ascent to high C#5 is unequaled.
   Perception of Turning in a Deeper 
   Voice
   Excellent examples of the more obvious turn typical of deeper voices 
   can be found in Ravel’s Kaddish recorded by Jos é Van Dam. In the long 
   melismatic passage on [ ɑ] near the end of the piece, Van Dam’s voice 
   turns over where expected. !e vowel shi/f_t is rather notable in this rich, 
   deep, beautiful voice, but is typical for such voice types ( Figure 9.2). (See 
   Appendix 5: Y ouTube Examples: Example 3, ca. 3:48) 
   E/uniFB00ect of Approach by Leap
   !e turn of the voice can be especially exciting when approached by leap 
   from below, since the inherent color change from open to close timbre 
   is placed in sharper distinction by the leap, even when smoothly done. 
   Many examples of the drama and thrill of the turn of the voice in exciting 
   top tones can be found. For example, Jussi Bjoerling’s recordings (video 
   with orchestra, audio with piano) of “A h ,  L o v e ,  b u t  a  d ay ! ” by Amy Beach 
   have several clear and compelling examples. (See Appendix 5: Y ouTube 
   Examples: Example 4) In the very /f_irst statement of the text, “ Ah, Love, but 
   Figure 9.2 Ravel Kaddish excerpt, mm. 46–53.
   PRAA.indb   85PRAA.indb   85 7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  86
   Figure 9.4 Beach Ah! Love, but a day! excerpt, mm. 26–32.
   a day, ” both the [ʌ] of “love” on F4 and the [ɛːi] in his pronunciation of “day” 
   on Eb4 are in open timbre. !is provides a clear comparison to the second 
   statement of the same text, in which both vowels turn over: the [ʌ] of “love” 
   on Ab4 and [ɛːi] of “day” on G4. Furthermore, the second occurrence of 
   “day, ” a/f_ter starting in close timbre on G4, opens during the portamento 
   down a major third to Eb4 (Figure 9.3). Later in this same phrase, the word 
   “world” also starts in close timbre on F4 and then opens with the downward 
   portamento to B3. A later example of how vowels vary from close to open 
   timbre in the same general tessitura occurs midway through the song at the 
   /f_irst entry of “Look in my eyes” (Figure 9.4). “Look” on the vowel [ ʊ] on 
   F4 is in close timbre, and the [ɑ] of “eyes” shortly a/f_terwards, though only 
   a half-step lower, is in open  timbre. !e second entry of this text begins 
   similarly, but this time the [ ɑ] of “eyes” begins in open timbre on Eb4, 
   then dramatically moves to close timbre in the leap up to the Ab4—G4. 
   !is continues with a close timbre [ ɪ] in “Wilt” on F4, and an open [ ɑ] 
   in “thou” on E4 that then closes on the step up to F4 in the orchestral 
   Figure 9.3 Beach Ah, Love, but a day! excerpt, mm. 2–9.
   PRAA.indb   86PRAA.indb   86 7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM7/10/2025   4:38:53 PM
   Perceptions of Turning Over 87
   recording, but not in the piano recording. While these timbral shi/f_ts are 
   smoothly accomplished, they are nonetheless quite evident, and become 
   part of the expressive in&ection of Bjoerling’s beautiful voice. !ey are 
   primarily passive acoustic events that result from his retaining a vowel 
   shape across the pitch of turning for that vowel.
   Darkened Timbre
   When depth is maintained during ascent, the singer may perceive 
   the timbre as more vertical and even somewhat darkened (see Cover 
   Terminology, p. 155). A second recording of Bjoerling in a live performance 
   of Handel’s “Ombra mai f ù” ( Figure 9.5 ) demonstrates a deliberately 
   “darkened timbre” which augments the eﬀects of turning as in a deeper 
   voice type, creating a rather dramatic eﬀect (see Appendix 5: Y ouTube 
   Examples: Example 5). If one lays aside questions of Baroque style by 
   today’s standards, this is a rather remarkable demonstration of vocalism 
   and of timbral openings and closings. For example, Bjoerling begins the 
   opening [o] on D4 of “Ombra” at 1:52 in close timbre and then crescendos 
   to open timbre via an [ ɔ]. While this migration may be caused by active 
   modi/f_ication (shape changing), such a migration will also occur simply 
   via crescendo, since an increase in intensity augments the strength of the 
   higher harmonic that populates the second resonance with its brighter 
   [~ɔ]-like timbre. 
   Later at 2:18, the [ ɑ] vowels in the ascending “cara ed a mabile” go 
   from open timbre on E4 and F#4 to dramatically close timbre on G4 
   (Figure 9.6) . In the subsequent setting of the same text at 2:45–52, [ ɑ] is 
   kept in open (or mini-turned) timbre while [ɛ] is close at about the same 
   pitches (Figure 9.7).
   Figure 9.5 Close to open on the same note and vowel.
   PRAA.indb   87PRAA.indb   87 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  88
   !e [u] of “fù” is close on B3 at 3:10 (Figure 9.8). !e high “di vegetabile” 
   begins predictably in close timbre, then opens on the E4 [ɑ].
   !e /f_inal high “soave più” closes on the F#4 “-ve” and stays in close 
   timbre on G4 “più” (Figure 9.9). Although remaining within close timbre, 
   the articulation of “più” is opened in order to be more robust. Staying in 
   close articulation when the sung pitch approaches F1 of a vowel will result 
   in whoop timbre—too “heady” for this climactic moment. !e mouth and 
   jaw are instead opened to that of a tall [ʊ]. Finally, the /f_inal [u] of “più” on 
   G3 at 3:49 is an example of a normally close vowel in open timbre for 
   greater intensity. 
   Figure 9.6 Dramatic stepwise turn on [ɑ].
   Figure 9.7 Comparison of [ɑ] and [ɛ].
   Figure 9.8 [ɑ] from close to open.
   PRAA.indb   88PRAA.indb   88 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
   Perceptions of Turning Over 89
   Timbral Openings and Closings 
   Other than fR1:2fo
   Lower timbral closings and openings, such as those that occur at the fR1:3fo 
   and even fR1:4fo junctures, can o/f_ten be clearly heard as well. Earlier in 
   the recording cited above of Ravel’s Kaddish sung by José Van Dam (See 
   Appendix 5: Y ouTube Examples: Example 3), the mini-turn of the fR1:3fo 
   crossing can be heard when Van Dam sings a melisma (at one minute into 
   the recording) on [ɑ] as it rises from F3 to Bb3. !e mini-turn happens at 
   Ab3, about a /f_i/f_th below the primary turn of [ɑ] (Figure 9.10).
   Figure 9.9 Comparison of high, close, yet robust [u] with low open [u].
   Figure 9.10 Ravel Kaddish excerpt, mm. 13–14.
   Figure 9.11 Portamento from close to open timbre on [i].
   Several excellent examples of fR1:2fo, fR1:3fo, and fR1:4fo crossings can be 
   heard in bass-baritone George London’s recording of Schubert’s “ An die 
   Musik” (See Appendix 5: Y ouTube Examples: Example 6). For example, 
   the portamento on “wieviel” at 0:14 from G#3 to B2 demonstrates the 
   primary fR1:2fo opening of the close vowel [i] (Figure 9.11). 
   PRAA.indb   89PRAA.indb   89 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  90
   Figure 9.14 Close, heady [ɪ] and [y]; then opening [ʊ] and [ɑ] on downward 
   leaps.
   At “wo mich des Lebens wilder Kreis, ” the singer goes from a close /ɪ/ 
   on G#3 at “mich” to an open /e/ on A#2 at “Lebens” and an open / ɪ/ at 
   “wilder. ” (Figure 9.12). 
   At 0:56 the [ɛ] of “bessre” on B3 is mini-turned (3fo is above fR1) and the 
   [ɛ] of “Welt” on D#4 at 0:58 is in close timbre (2 fo is above fR1). !e 
   following melismas of [ ɛ] on “bessre” (B3-D#3) and “Welt” (F#3-A#2) 
   demonstrate the 3 fo opening and the 4 fo opening respectively, since 
   London’s primary pitch of turning for [ɛ] is C4 (Figure 9.13).
   At 2:19 the strategy of keeping [i] and [y] in close articulation is used to 
   generate a so/f_t head tone eﬀect (approaching whoop timbre). !en, the 
   /f_inal descending portamenti on “Kunst” and “danke” demonstrate the 
   fR1:2fo opening of close [ʊ] and the fR1:4fo opening of [ɑ] (Figure 9.14).
   Figure 9.12 From close /ɪ/ to open /e/ and /ɪ/.
   Figure 9.13 Open [ɛ] to close [ɛ]; mini-turned [ɛ] to very open [ɛ].
   PRAA.indb   90PRAA.indb   90 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
   Perceptions of Turning Over 91
   For additional aural examples of these acoustic registration events, 
   approximate sounds of vowel openings and closings can be demonstrated 
   by voice type and vowel using the Madde synthesizer, if one knows how to 
   model type and vowel with appropriate formant settings. (See Madde 
   Explorations 3 and 4, pp. 174–5 and Further Madde Explorations, p. 177.)
   Note
   1 !e relative closeness of [ʊ] and [o] is debatable, and depends upon 
   pronunciation. In this author’s experience, the F1 of resonant [ʊ] is higher, 
   making it more open.
   PRAA.indb   91PRAA.indb   91 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
   PRAA.indb   92PRAA.indb   92 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics
   10
   Pedagogic Implications of 
   Tube Acoustics
   Since the vocal tract is essentially a quarter-wave tube resonator with 
   natural resonances that vary by tube shape (i.e., that vary by vowel), then 
   the following principles and strategies can form a reliable basis for a 
   coherent, practical acoustic pedagogy.
   General Principles
   z In seeking harmonic:resonance matches, singers are not really 
   free to tune their harmonics. Harmonics automatically occur at 
   mathematical relationships above the fundamental frequency (pitch) 
   upon which they are built and which they are given by the composer 
   to sing. Singers do have the ability to shape the vocal tract to retune 
   the resonances, especially fR1 and fR2, that determine which harmonics 
   are activated and selectively featured.
   z !ere are four possible resonance:harmonic interactions:
   − A resonance can allow a moving harmonic to pass through it (a 
   change of acoustic register).
   − A resonance can be tuned to move across a stable harmonic (a 
   change of vowel and acoustic register on the same pitch).
   − A resonance can be tuned to match and steadily retuned to track 
   a moving harmonic (yell, whoop).
   PRAA.indb   93PRAA.indb   93 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  94
   Pedagogic Implications of Tube Acoustics
   − A resonance can avoid a harmonic coupling: (fR1 kept above 1fo to 
   avoid whoop timbre; or fR2 tuned away from a higher harmonic 
   to avoid shrillness).
   z All acoustic registration events occur relative to the /f_irst resonance/
   /f_irst formant location of each vowel. (!e second formant may also 
   be secondarily involved.)
   z Laryngeal registration adjustments are sometimes independent 
   of acoustic registration events but are also o/f_ten in&uenced by 
   interaction with acoustic registration phenomena.
   z !ere is an audible event whenever any harmonic crosses the /f_irst 
   resonance: a timbral closing when a harmonic rises through fR1, and 
   a timbral opening when a harmonic drops below fR1.
   z If tube length and shape are kept the same, the vowel and timbre 
   will increasingly close with ascending pitch up to whoop timbre and 
   increasingly open with descending pitch.
   z A voice does not turn over at the same pitch for all vowels.
   z Each vowel will turn over just above an octave below its /f_irst formant, 
   where the 2 fo of the pitch being sung rises su#ciently above the 
   vowel’s /f_irst resonance.
   z Other mini-closings or openings—involving higher harmonics 
   intersecting fR1—also occur at locations that are predictable by 
   vowel, pitch, and vocal Fach.
   z Predictable, stable turning/crossing locations indicate a stable tube 
   length and shape.
   z !ere are only two ways to raise the /f_irst formant:
   − tube shortening
   − vowel opening (mouth and jaw opening and dorsum lowering)
   z !ere are only two ways to lower the /f_irst formant:
   − tube lengthening
   − vowel closing (mouth and jaw closing and dorsum raising)
   z Changes in tube length are rarely an appropriate strategy in Western 
   classical technique, except for the extreme high treble register. 
   However, they are typical in most CCM genres.
   z Exercises that explore the shi/f_ts of harmonic:resonance crossings 
   assist students in sorting out:
   − what can stay the same across range and vowel
   − what must change across range and vowel
   PRAA.indb   94PRAA.indb   94 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
   Pedagogic Implications of Tube Acoustics 95
   z Awareness of /f_irst formant locations and of the characteristics of 
   resonance:harmonic interactions can form the basis for creative, 
   eﬀective strategies:
   − for basic range development
   − for range or registration challenges that arise within the repertoire
   Acoustic Strategies across Range
   z As long as the pitch being sung is low enough, that is, an octave 
   or more below the /f_irst formant of the vowel being sung, there 
   are enough harmonics available for resonation by the vocal tract 
   formants to preclude the need for signi/f_icant formant tuning beyond 
   assuming a generally resonant posture (an unconstricted throat, 
   li/f_ted palate, fronted tongue, that is, adjusted for convergent, singer’s 
   formant/chiaroscuro timbre).
   z For Western classical timbre, all harmonics other than 1 fo should 
   be allowed to pass through fR1, that is, without formant tracking. 
   !is takes training, since it is instinctive for the /f_irst resonance to 
   track rising harmonics, especially 2 fo (yell timbre) and 1 fo (whoop 
   timbre). For musical theater belt and many world music styles, fR1 
   should track 2fo—as in the yell or call—up to ca. Bb4, but at healthy 
   transglottal pressure diﬀerence and air&ow levels.
   z Below the primary open to close timbre transition (the fR1:2fo 
   crossing), stay relatively close in pronunciation, keeping the /f_irst 
   formant comfortably low for the vowel being sung.
   z Allow 2 fo to rise above fR1 at the /f_irst formant’s normal resonant 
   speech location, causing the primary acoustic transition of “turning 
   over” at that point.
   z Above the fR1:2fo crossing into close timbre, if the vocal tract length 
   and/or vowel closeness are increased, fR1 will be lowered further and 
   the voice will move into whoop timbre earlier (lower), that is, in well 
   less than an octave. !is is a strategy typical of some treble voices, 
   who prefer the more “head-dominant” timbre of Western classical 
   singing.
   PRAA.indb   95PRAA.indb   95 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  96
   z Above the fR1:2fo crossing into close timbre, if the vocal tract length 
   and closeness are maintained, the timbre will become increasingly 
   close until full whoop timbre is reached at the fR1:1fo juncture. !is is 
   also a strategy typical of treble voices, which prefer the more “head-
   dominant” timbre of Western classical singing.
   z Above the fR1:2fo crossing into close timbre, if the vowel is gradually 
   opened within c l o s e  t i m b r e ,  t h a t  i s ,  n o t  s o  m u c h  a s  t o  a l l o w  fR1 
   to overtake 2 fo, whoop timbre can be postponed or even avoided 
   altogether, and more of an extended close/“chest mix” timbre will 
   be maintained. !is is the typical strategy of non-treble voices, who 
   prefer a more virile upper voice, unless seeking a heady, so/f_ter eﬀect. 
   !is is especially needed on those close vowels whose F1 locations 
   are within non-treble range. !is is also a strategy used in high belt 
   mix.
   z At the fR1:1fo coupling, full whoop timbre (very heady/falsetto) is 
   achieved, which is very typical and desirable for treble voices in 
   Western classical singing.
   z When in whoop (fR1:1fo dominant) timbre, if fR2 is close to a higher 
   harmonic, the timbre will be brighter and possibly shrill, depending 
   on how much the higher harmonic is reinforced. In that situation, 
   detuning fR2 (moving it farther away from the harmonic) by active 
   vowel modi/f_ication will increase the timbral warmth and roundness.
   z Above the fR1:1fo (whoop timbre) juncture, the /f_irst resonance/formant 
   must be raised in tandem with the rising fundamental (1fo) in order 
   to maintain timbral fullness or avoid thinning. !is is accomplished 
   primarily by vowel opening, but eventually by tube shortening in the 
   extreme upper range of treble voices (ca. B5 and above).
   z An alternative strategy for treble voices above the fR1:1fo (whoop 
   timbre) juncture might be to allow 1fo (the sung pitch) to rise above 
   fR1 by retaining a closer vowel articulation if a high so/f_t tone with less 
   warmth but more sparkle (a silvery, but thinner “&oat” quality) is 
   sought. At loud dynamic levels, this strategy would result in a shrill 
   tone.
   z When fR1 can be raised no further, ending fR1 tracking of the sung 
   pitch’s 1fo, higher pitches will be in whistle register, being resonated 
   possibly by a clustering of fR1 and fR2 or just by fR2.
   PRAA.indb   96PRAA.indb   96 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
   Pedagogic Implications of Tube Acoustics 97
   Dynamics
   z Crescendos increase the intensity of higher partials more than lower 
   partials, creating a shallower spectral slope and brighter timbre with 
   a higher percentage of over-vowel tone color.
   z Decrescendos decrease the intensity of higher partials more than of 
   lower partials, creating a steeper spectral slope and warmer timbre 
   with a lower percentage of over-vowel tone color, and relatively 
   more under-vowel. Since the under-vowel is most o/f_ten featuring 
   the complementary tone color, this results in a vowel migration that 
   is internalizing, rounding, and neutralizing.
   PRAA.indb   97PRAA.indb   97 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
   PRAA.indb   98PRAA.indb   98 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics
   11
   Strategies That Encourage 
   Tube Stability and a 
   Convergent Resonator
   The Open Throat
   A vocal tract poised for resonance ( chiaroscuro, singer’s formant timbre) 
   should be prepared prior to singing by means of a relatively open 
   (unconstricted) throat and some degree of tube convergence. However, 
   /f_inding this pre-phonatory posture is challenging for students since our 
   kinesthesia for throat shape is quite misleading. Most people perceive [ɑ] 
   to be the most “open throated” vowel posture and [i] to be the least open 
   throated, when the opposite is in fact the case (see Figure 11.1).
   Several strategies can circumvent this false kinesthesia: a noiseless 
   inhalation, an appropriate F2 frequency target (not too high per vowel), an 
   accurate remapping of the throat and tongue, articulatory e#ciency, and 
   the use of appropriate motivational aﬀects.
   Noiseless Inhalation
   A noiseless inhalation  is evidence  of a su#ciently open throat. It can 
   be accomplished by a subtle palatal li/f_t (felt more frontally, toward the 
   hard palate) accompanied by inhaling in such a way that the front of the 
   PRAA.indb   99PRAA.indb   99 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  100
   Strategies for Tube Stability and Resonator Convergence
   mouth—the teeth, tongue blade, and hard palate—is cooled rather than 
   the throat. Wherever the vocal tract is the coolest, it is either the point of 
   the earliest air contact and heat exchange, or the narrowest, since that is 
   where air speed will be the quickest and the resultant wind chill eﬀect the 
   strongest. Shaping the mouth and throat so that the cooling is in the front 
   of the mouth causes the throat to be more open and the resonator more 
   convergent.
   Lowering the Second Formant 
   Frequency
   A second strategy to achieve a convergent resonator for a noiseless 
   inhalation is to shape the mouth and throat in a way that lowers the “pitch” 
   and reduces the intensity of inhalatory noise until it is inaudible. High-
   frequency inhalatory noise highlights a raised F2 location, indicating a 
   narrowed throat as is typical in whispering. Lowering the “pitch” and 
   audibility of inhalatory noise deconstricts the throat, lowers the F2 pitch to 
   its more passive pitch location, and allows enough low-frequency content 
   to subtly perceive the F1 location as well. !is does not require laryngeal 
   depression or any sensation of eﬀort in the neck; rather, it is helped by 
   Figure 11.1 Side view of the vocal tract shape of [i] and [ ɑ]. Paradoxical 
   to one’s kinesthesia, [i] is open throated and [ɑ] is fairly closed throated.
   PRAA.indb   100PRAA.indb   100 7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM
   Strategies for Tube Stability and Resonator Convergence 101
   avoiding over-articulation, using internalizing aﬀects such as concerned 
   skepticism, and reconceiving dark timbre as being in front and bright 
   timbre in back.
   Remapping the Throat and Tongue
   When making the false open-throated sensation of the “yawny” [ ɑ], the 
   location of the back throat wall seems to be behind (and below) the ears, 
   an anatomical impossibility. What is most likely being felt are those lateral 
   tongue muscles (styloglossus) that attach to the styloid processes beneath 
   the ears and retract the tongue toward the back throat wall. Remapping the 
   throat wall to its actual location in front of (and below) the ears releases 
   tongue retraction, allowing a passively fronted tongue and more throat 
   space. Furthermore, many 
   singers map the tongue 
   like an inverted “L ” that 
   descends vertically down to 
   the larynx. Although there 
   are some lateral muscle 
   attachments below to the 
   hyoid bone (hyoglossus), 
   the largest portion of the 
   tongue muscle, forming 
   its body, the genioglossus, 
   loops back under the 
   tongue blade, originating 
   at its attachment on the 
   inside back of the chin. Remapping the tongue in this way creates more 
   independence of tongue and larynx and releases the tongue for greater 
   height and passive fronting. (see Figure 11.2.)
   Monitoring Tube Length Stability
   As explained above, the eﬀect of laryngeal position on tube length 
   stability can be monitored—in students whose anatomy lends itself 
   Figure 11.2 Mapping the tongue.
   PRAA.indb   101PRAA.indb   101 7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  102
   to easy identi/f_ication of laryngeal structure—by gently palpating the 
   thyrohyoid space (see Figure 8.1 , p. 66). !e thyrohyoid space should 
   be relatively open and not rise and close appreciably (as it does in 
   swallowing) with pitch ascent. !ough this space varies in size between 
   individuals, it may also have been reduced in size by residual tension 
   from the unnecessary, habitual activation of swallowing muscles 
   during speech production. If such behavior is entrenched, it should 
   be patiently but persistently countered and broken, preferably through 
   therapy with a licensed, voice-specialized speech-language pathologist 
   familiar with appropriate therapies. Eﬀective strategies include massage 
   and stretching of the thyrohyoid space, monitoring the looseness and 
   openness of the thyrohyoid space during speech production, and 
   vocalizing with a passively low larynx and a wide, extended “rolled” 
   tongue position. Second, tube length stability can be assessed by 
   visually monitoring the location of the Adam’s apple. !is method is 
   more useful for biological males, due to their larger average laryngeal 
   anatomy, and for those with less &eshy, trimmer necks in which 
   structures are more easily visible. Finally, tube length stability can be 
   assessed by aurally monitoring the consistency of timbral depth. !is 
   is less reliable, since it can be falsely mimicked by various articulatory 
   manipulations of tongue and lips, but careful listening and observation 
   can reduce this liability.
   E/uniFB03ciency of Articulation
   Another strategy for maintaining a convergent resonator while singing 
   is to minimize the jawing of diction, reducing excessive orality. Neither 
   vocal resonance, nor vowel articulation, nor vowel diﬀerentiation require 
   exaggerated jaw drop or excessive articulatory change in the lower and 
   middle range, as long as there is su#cient internal space. On the contrary, 
   vowels can seem fairly close to each other in formation. All of these 
   strategies improve throat ease and openness, and a passively settled F1, 
   increasing resonator convergence.
   PRAA.indb   102PRAA.indb   102 7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM
   Strategies for Tube Stability and Resonator Convergence 103
   Use of A/uniFB00ect to Position and 
   Stabilize the Resonator
   A completely lax vocal structure is vulnerable to sudden changes of 
   pressure or situation and is therefore incompatible with optimal 
   resonance, extremes of dynamic and range, and control of expressive 
   timbral variety. Aﬀect can position and stabilize the vocal apparatus 
   more eﬀectively than direct physical manipulation. Speci/f_ic, ample, and 
   sincere expressions are typically accompanied by poised, toned vocal 
   tract con/f_igurations which are physically stable but stop short of overt 
   muscular manipulation or rigidity. Early Italian pedagogues maintained 
   that inhaling “through a smile” opened the throat. !is is more a 
   matter of the internal, pharyngeal poise of genuine, deep expression 
   of pleasure than about lip shape, though facial expression follows 
   secondarily. More recently a number of these aﬀective positionings 
   of the vocal tract have been tested and documented by voice teacher/
   researcher Jo Estill and reported by Kimberly Steinhauer (2008). For 
   example, a suppressed laugh may stimulate retraction of the false vocal 
   folds, reducing the possibility of pressed phonation. Strong amusement 
   or mischief can li/f_t and stabilize the so/f_t palate and comfortably /f_irm 
   the pharynx.
   Tonal “Placement” Sensations
   Any discussion about tonal “placement” sensation, that is, locational 
   somatosense, is risky, since the placement of sound is an illusion in the 
   /f_irst place, and perception of tonal sensations are somewhat variable 
   from individual to individual in the second place. Furthermore, tonal 
   sensation is comprised of various components, probably due to a voice 
   having multiple resonances and complex pressure waves with multiple 
   nodes and antinodes. Attention can therefore be drawn to any single 
   aspect of a tone’s overall sensation. Finally, the spectral content (number 
   and spacing of harmonics) of low-pitched sounds is dramatically diﬀerent 
   PRAA.indb   103PRAA.indb   103 7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  104
   from that of high-pitched sounds, as is frequency-dependent vibrotactile 
   sensation (Ballantyne 2025), generating changes in somatosense across 
   range. It is therefore prudent to proceed with caution and &exibility 
   when suggesting tonal “placement” sensations. Nonetheless, there 
   is both considerable overlap in historically reported sensation, with 
   successful historic pedagogy being rife with the sensorial terminology 
   of procedural knowledge —what it feels like to do an activity. !ere is 
   also potential acoustic basis for locations of tonal sensations. Consider 
   the diﬀerences in acoustic sensation between yelling (2 fo do mina n t fR1, 
   with strong upper partials) and whooping (1fo dominant fR1, with weaker 
   upper partials). Although we now know that vibrotactile sensation only 
   extends to 1000 Hz, the presence of strong, high partials aﬀects overall 
   intensity and may thereby strengthen the somatosense of lower, feelable 
   spectral content. High frontal sensory feedback is o/f_ten reported by the 
   singer, corollary to high spectral content in the sound, even though high-
   frequency content is out of range of somatosense (Ballantyne 2025). 
   First formant/fundamental frequency-dominant sounds are reported as 
   feeling rounder and sensed more centrally in the head and pharyngeal 
   column.
   Second Formant “Placement” 
   Sensations
   In this regard, front and back vowel placement sensations are paradoxical. 
   It is innate and universal in humans to perceive bright as forward and 
   dark as in back. One might then assume that front vowels are felt in 
   the front and back vowels in the back. Curiously, almost the opposite 
   is the case (see Figure 11.3 ) when acoustically e#cient. !is may be 
   due to the locations of the pressure nodes of the standing waveform of 
   vowel formants. For a balanced overall timbre and sensation, noticing or 
   anticipating the acoustic energy location of the target vowel tone color—
   for speech range pitches at least—according to the locations mapped 
   below, helps to keep vowels “aligned, ” the tongue dorsum su#ciently 
   PRAA.indb   104PRAA.indb   104 7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM
   Strategies for Tube Stability and Resonator Convergence 105
   high and fronted, the larynx and /f_irst formant low, the resonator 
   convergent, and the timbre balanced or chiaroscuro. !is is more evident 
   in non-treble range, since for higher pitches with appropriate vowel 
   modi/f_ication (vowel opening), tonal sensations become increasingly 
   vertical and centralized in the head.
   Figure 11.3 Locational somatosense (“placement”) of target vowel tone 
   color in speech articulation. (Vowel articulation shapes are not represented 
   in this illustration.)
   PRAA.indb   105PRAA.indb   105 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
   PRAA.indb   106PRAA.indb   106 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics
   12
   The Acoustics of Belting
   Increasingly over the last thirty years or so, voice teachers, including those 
   trained primarily or exclusively in unampli/f_ied Western classical singing, 
   have been called upon to address a wider variety of singing styles. While 
   this text focuses more on the acoustics of unampli/f_ied classical singing 
   practice, another dominant, alternative muscular and acoustic strategy 
   appears to be the basis of—or at least to play a signi/f_icant role in—many 
   other styles of singing. !at vocal style possibly evolved from “calling” 
   over distances, but is now referred to in musical theater circles as belting, 
   and will be brie&y addressed below. Research and conclusions about 
   belting are still evolving. As of this publication, the dominant paradigm 
   observes that belting, acoustically speaking, is a skillful, sustainable form 
   of what we have here de/f_ined acoustically as the yell: a strong fR1 tracking 
   of 2fo above the normal frequency of F1 for the vowel(s) in question. It 
   is no surprise that this mode of phonation is a very common strategy in 
   popular music, world music, as well as in musical theater. Its unskillful, 
   raw form—yelling—is universal among humans. It is powerful, usually 
   clear, high in energy, expressive, and emotionally strong. Because of its 
   higher energy and potentially high transglottal pressure diﬀerence levels, 
   it also poses higher health risks if unskillfully executed. Y et it is also 
   apparent that those singers who master the skills necessary for this form 
   of vocalism manage to sustain long and healthy careers. Let’s /f_irst review 
   the acoustic characteristics of the raw yell:
   Yell Characteristics Reviewed
   Y ell timbre and function are accomplished by raising the /f_irst formant 
   through:
   PRAA.indb   107PRAA.indb   107 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
   Practical Vocal Acoustics  108
   The Acoustics of Belting
4) tube shortening (larynx raising),
5) pharyngeal narrowing, and
6) mouth widening;
7) that is, by creating a more divergent resonator shape.
   !e /f_irst two of these maneuvers are normally accomplished by 
   activating swallowing muscles, which raise and partially constrict the 
   laryngopharynx, narrowing the throat and preventing the use of the 
   singer’s formant chiaroscuro timbre. Furthermore, a higher laryngeal 
   position facilitates glottal closure strength, potentially in&uencing the 
   vibrator function toward pressed phonation, especially if the brighter 
   “over-vowel” component is conceptually fronted.
   Y elling is typically done on open vowels like [a] or [ ɛ], because their 
   high F1 locations and inherently divergent shapes make them more 
   compatible with the acoustic requirements of the yell. !e yell is necessarily 
   chest register (TA) or mechanism one dominant.
   Belting: The Skillful Yell or Call
   (see Semantic Diﬀerences/Belting and Y elling, p. 122.)
   Which characteristics of yelling are necessary for belting and which 
   modi/f_ications of raw yelling are needed for skillful belting? !e issue is in 
   large part how to accomplish the acoustic eﬀect of yelling at breath pressure 
   (transglottal pressure diﬀerence), breath &ow, and glottal resistance levels 
   that are sustainable and healthy.
   At present, there seems to be general agreement on the following 
   principles:
8) Belting is bright and perceptually speech- or call-like in quality.
9) Belting calls for some divergence in vocal tract shaping.
10) !erefore, the three characteristics of yelling listed above seem 
    necessary to some degree (elevated larynx, narrowed pharynx, 
    widened mouth).
11) Vibrational mechanism one is extended higher—than in classical 
    treble voice singing at least—but may be achieved with a 
    somewhat thinner vocal fold shape (still thicker than mechanism 
    PRAA.indb   108PRAA.indb   108 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    The Acoustics of Belting 109
    two, but somewhat less thick—referred to by some as “mix” when 
    su#ciently high), that retains the auditory roughness (buzziness) 
    of “chest” timbre but with less he/f_t, sheer breath force, and air&ow.
12) Belt only really commences above the normal fR1:2fo intersections, 
    especially of the mid to open vowels, where the possibility of yelling 
    would also start. In other words, belt is initially an extension of 
    open timbre, but not all open timbre is in belt mode.
    Mouth widening is usually necessary in order to achieve and maintain fR1 
    tracking of 2fo. However, in order to reduce transglottal pressure diﬀerence 
    and resultant glottal resistance to sustainable levels:
13) !e degree of larynx raising and pharynx narrowing is probably 
    moderated somewhat (some belt specialists even maintain that 
    while the larynx is not lowered for belt, raising the larynx is not 
    necessary);
14) Contraction/adduction of the false vocal folds may be inhibited by 
    means of strategies such as the “suppressed laugh” aﬀect (Estill);
15) Breath &ow is signi/f_icantly reduced to avoid the “air blast” of a raw yell;
16) Some downstream “bene/f_icial narrowing” in the pharynx and/or 
    at the tongue dorsum:palatal narrowing is employed to achieve 
    “twang, ” (a brassy quality created by stronger high harmonics 
    and strong higher formant components analogous to the singer’s 
    formant cluster of classical sound, but more spread out, higher, 
    and without the complementary depth). !is strategy improves 
    e#ciency: more acoustic output for less pressure input.
    Among specialists in belt, strategies are employed that:
17) achieve clean, /f_irm, sustainable glottal closure throughout the 
    range to ensure high-frequency spectral content.
18) maximize ring/twang within the limits of the character being 
    portrayed.
19) extend a bright, speech-like vowel shaping and quality across 
    the entire range, sacri/f_icing the depth and roundness of Western 
    classical timbre to this brighter aesthetic. It might be termed 
    chiarochiaro (bright/bright) timbre, in contrast and comparison to 
    the chiaroscuro (bright/dark) timbre of classical singing.
20) the choice of brighter vowels  (higher frequency F2s and target 
    spectral tone colors).
    PRAA.indb   109PRAA.indb   109 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  110
21) though the resultant sound can move in the direction of pressed 
    phonation and may sound pressed to ears accustomed to Western 
    classical timbre, the actual function can be accomplished by 
    acoustic strategies that emphasize upper partials and formants, 
    coupled with a level of glottal closure that is clean and strong but 
    is nonetheless comfortable, sustainable, and healthy, in which the 
    transglottal pressure diﬀerence, which determines the necessary 
    glottal resistance level, is kept su#ciently low.
    Muscular Factors in Belting
    !ere are muscular or biomechanical factors involving the vocal folds, the 
    vocal tract, and breath management that accompany skillful, sustainable 
    belting.
    Vocal Fold Factors
    As mentioned above, the thicker vocal fold shape of vibrational mechanism 
    one (chest) is maintained into the upper voice of non-treble belters and 
    extended through the middle voice of treble voice belters. Opinions vary 
    as to just how far treble voices can extend this mechanism, but range at 
    least to C5, if not higher. Individuals will certainly vary in achievable 
    ability. However, one respected source reports that Broadway casters 
    typically post the following expectations: “Must belt to D, must mix to F , 
    must sing legit to A. ” (Lovetri 2012).
    Mix
    !e question of “mix” is controverted. !ere is no actual separate physical 
    register for mix, if by register we mean a discrete laryngeal, muscularly 
    caused function with its own distinct timbre. Many teachers—and 
    Broadway casting agents—nonetheless use the term. What is probably 
    meant by most for the term “mix” is:
    PRAA.indb   110PRAA.indb   110 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    The Acoustics of Belting 111
22) an area of cooperation between the vocal fold shortening, 
    thickening thyroarytenoids and the vocal fold-stretching, thinning 
    cricothyroids; that nonetheless
23) stays essentially in mechanism one (and retains its characteristic 
    “buzziness”); but
24) with a moderated thickness; and
25) an acoustic strategy that enables sustainably lower transglottal 
    pressure diﬀerence levels.
    A more recent investigator (Howell) observes that, although the fR1:2fo 
    tracking strategy that extends open timbre higher does maintain the 
    intensity of that tracked second harmonic, the auditory roughness 
    (“buzziness”) and brassy quality that characterize belt do not come 
    from that strong 2 fo. !e second harmonics of belt range sounds 
    remain within the spectral tone color range of [~ ɔ] and [~ ɑ] and can 
    only add a warming, rounding eﬀect. Higher-numbered harmonics 
    are needed, both for brighter timbre and for buzzier roughness. !ose 
    belt characteristics are supplied by stronger, closely clustered, higher 
    harmonics ((6 fo) being resonated by higher vocal tract resonances. 
    Apparently, 2fo tracking and intensity facilitate stronger, higher partials 
    and formants as well.
    Vocal Tract Factors
    In addition to the generally more divergent vocal tract shape, most belt 
    specialists would agree on the need for a relatively poised, stabilized vocal 
    tract, toned and tuned for maximal ring. !is would involve:
26) a /f_irmed, li/f_ted, fronted so/f_t palate sensation, done in such a way as 
    not to darken the timbre, rather in a way that facilitates ring;
27) a narrowed aryepiglottic exit and/or pharyngeal narrowing to 
    maximize twang/upper harmonics;
28) avoidance of false vocal fold compression, which might introduce 
    a noise element and require higher, less sustainable breath pressure 
    levels;
29) more lateral lip opening than is typical for Western classical 
    timbre.
    PRAA.indb   111PRAA.indb   111 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  112
    All of these shaping, positioning factors should be accomplished as 
    comfortably as possible. !e muscles involved in shaping will not be 
    lax; rather, expressively, comfortably /f_irm, though not felt to be tight or 
    constricted. Safe motivations for such positioning include various strong 
    aﬀects (such as con/f_ident assertion) that stimulate the desired response. 
    When the optimal tuning of the resonator is achieved, the sounds produced 
    will have maximal comfort at the vocal folds and neck and e#cient air&ow 
    levels, as if the sound originates from the top of the pharynx or higher, 
    not from the lower throat or larynx. Strategies (sensorial, procedural 
    intentions) that can assist the e#cient, brighter timbres required of the 
    belt aesthetic include: a relatively high tongue dorsum; pleasurable aﬀects 
    that cause a stretchy smile sensation across the mid-hard palate just in 
    front of the molars; tipping the head up a bit to “expose” your hard palate; 
    avoidance of dorsum lowering and tongue &attening; the eye-squint/nose-
    scrunch look that accompanies con/f_ident assertion; sensing the sound 
    higher, in and above the hard palate rather than low in the fore-mouth; 
    and a short mouth-to-back wall distance perception.
    Breath Management Factors
    While sharing the characteristics of good function common to other 
    styles, breath management for belting does call for especially high 
    energization, lower air&ow, and somewhat higher air pressure levels. 
    Although active contraction of the thorax (bearing down in a Valsalva 
    maneuver) to achieve these diﬀerences is not recommended, there may 
    well be an awareness of the higher abdominal muscle contraction levels 
    that accompany the stronger, dramatic aﬀects expressed in belting. Excess 
    thoracic compression can be avoided by stabilizing ribcage expansion to 
    some degree. For example, the muscles that pull the shoulders laterally 
    down and out are attached to and expand the ribs, inhibiting their 
    downward and inward compression, as can the external intercostal 
    muscles. Motivating this upper chest expansion with an aﬀective stimulus 
    (such as excitement) can reduce the risk of counterproductive rigidity or 
    active chest compression. A sense of whole-body involvement and full 
    but unforced commitment to expression will help distribute the extra 
    PRAA.indb   112PRAA.indb   112 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    The Acoustics of Belting 113
    work that the high energy levels of belting require. A tonal locational 
    somatosense that is higher, above the palate or in the area of the 
    nasopharynx rather than in the throat, recruits less forceful breath use. 
    !e singer should not perceive the higher pressure levels to be localized 
    just below the vocal folds or in the neck; rather, they should have a sense 
    of a higher energy involvement of the entire body that is best organized 
    by sincere expression.
    PRAA.indb   113PRAA.indb   113 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    PRAA.indb   114PRAA.indb   114 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics
    13
    Semantic Di/uniFB00erences
    It is an understatement to observe that there has always been a variety 
    of vocal pedagogic opinion and terminology. To be sure, a teacher’s 
    choice of words—given the variety of possible attendant associations and 
    implications—can have signi/f_icant pedagogic rami/f_ications. Furthermore, 
    the procedural knowledge needed for motor intentions, being subjective 
    and sensorial, is di#cult to articulate and requires descriptive &exibility. 
    !is leads to inevitable semantic diﬀerences and disagreements. However, 
    the extent of disagreement may well be reduced by honest, open dialogue 
    and a clearer de/f_inition of terms. Several such controverted terms will be 
    discussed below for the sake of clarity and good will.
    Cover Terminology
    As has been pointed out earlier, the primary turn of the voice from voce 
    aperta to voce chiusa at the fR1:2fo crossing is associated with the historic 
    terms vocal cover and covered. !is nomenclature unfortunately has 
    signi/f_icant baggage and does not mean the same thing to all teachers or 
    past great singers. In a public master class, Italian tenor Luciano Pavarotti 
    demonstrated and used the term cover—in the opinion of this author—
    for the same phenomenon that this text refers to as the passive vowel 
    migration that accompanies a well-executed, resonant turn of the voice. 
    (See Appendix 5: Y ouTube Examples: Example 7, p. 184.) Furthermore, in 
    another interview, Pavarotti described cover as “closing, ” a darker timbre, 
    and more elegant (See Y ouTube Examples: Example 8); and /f_inally, in a 
    third interview, went as far as to claim that if you do not cover, you are “not 
    PRAA.indb   115PRAA.indb   115 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  116
    Semantic Di/uniFB00erences
    a real tenor” (See Y ouTube Examples: Example 9). Spanish tenor Alfredo 
    Kraus maintained that he didn’t believe in cover, and though his timbre 
    was in general on the bright and at times open side, his voice did in fact 
    turn over at or near predictable locations. !ere are many such variant 
    views and uses of terms to be found, expressed by people that nonetheless 
    seem to sing and/or teach successfully. Some prefer to eliminate or at 
    least reduce any awareness of the passaggio or passaggio events. Indeed, 
    when well executed, sensations accompanying the turn will usually seem 
    subtle, acoustic, even automatic, rather than muscular, enabling an ease of 
    production. Others, such as American tenor Rockwell Blake (in a public 
    master class), described the zona di passaggio—as Garcia did—as a matter 
    of “adding dark timbre” in order to preserve an adult sound (See Appendix 
    5: Y ouTube Examples: Example 10). It is fairly easy to appreciate that an 
    open yell will sound younger, less elegant, immature, shallower, and more 
    strained in timbre. Allowing the fR1:2fo turn adds or retains depth and 
    color, results in a greater percentage of the “under-vowel” tone color, and 
    may indeed seem darker in timbre to the singer, but need not sacri/f_ice ring 
    to any great extent for the audience, and will enhance a more organized 
    version of timbral ring than that of the yell.
    Connecting Terms with Acoustic 
    Strategies
    Just below the point of the fR1:2fo crossing there are at least three possible 
    strategies that parallel the three strategies listed earlier just above the turn 
    (see Resonance Strategies between Turning and Whoop, p. 52):
30) !e /f_irst resonance//f_irst formant could be actively lowered to 
    precipitate the turn earlier/lower. It is precisely this type of 
    heavy c o v e r—accompanied by a more dramatic darkening and 
    modi/f_ication of the vowel—which many /f_ind objectionable. 
    Unfortunately, this strategy is equated by some teachers and 
    singers with the very de/f_inition of cover. !e physical correlates 
    to this approach include a closer vowel pronunciation, a lowered 
    larynx, and rounded or even trumpeted (extended) lips—in other 
    words, active tube lengthening and vowel closing.
    PRAA.indb   116PRAA.indb   116 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    Semantic Di/uniFB00erences117
31) !e /f_irst resonance//f_irst formant location could be deliberately 
    maintained, allowing the passive migration that occurs as 2fo slips 
    above fR1 as the sung pitch is raised. !is is what the term cover 
    means in this text. !e vowel is allowed to migrate smoothly to 
    a slightly closer neighbor by means of pitch change, not shape 
    change. !e original vocal tract and vowel shape and internal 
    height is in fact deliberately maintained through the passaggio, 
    while the vowel quality and locational somatosense is allowed to 
    migrate subtly. With this approach it is important not to collapse 
    the sense of internal height (top back “corners” near the jaw joints) 
    or vowel shape, not to “give in” to the vowel migration with shape 
    changes, nor to form the speech-level shape of the resultant tone 
    color or more neutral under-vowel as if it were the target vowel 
    (unless a more dramatic turn is desired). !e vocal tract form is 
    most eﬀectively maintained by sustaining the motivating aﬀect.
32) !e /f_irst resonance//f_irst formant could be either deliberately or 
    instinctively raised by vowel opening, extending open timbre 
    upward and delaying the turn of the voice. !is can only be done 
    well if diction allows and just for a few pitches higher without 
    turning into an open yell.
    Furthermore, the terms cover and covered, while accurately describing the 
    subjective procedural perception that the sound feels more internalized 
    and less exposed, might imply a muting or mu)ing of the sound, qualities 
    not usually desired. For these reasons, most teachers avoid these terms 
    and substitute instead “turning over” and “turned over” as well as “the 
    turn of the voice. ” In working out the transition zone with a young non-
    treble singer, it may be temporarily necessary and useful to overcorrect a 
    strong yell instinct with strategy number one: a deliberate precipitation of 
    the turn, by lowering fR1 through moving to a closer vowel and/or slightly 
    longer tube. !is maneuver may result in a tone that is too dark, dull, 
    and potentially too heavy for a /f_inal product. !at would require eventual 
    rebalancing. Subsequently, attempting a smooth “timbral glissando” on a 
    single pitch—from an open timbre slowly and smoothly through the turn 
    to a close timbre—may pass through an ideal timbral balance along the 
    way. For example: have a tenor voice sing the following progression: [ɛ ɪ e i]  
    on a D4, gradually and simultaneously closing the vowel and deepening 
    the timbre by elevating the tongue dorsum in back. If the larynx is stably 
    PRAA.indb   117PRAA.indb   117 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  118
    low, the timbre should close either on the [e] or between the [ ɪ] and the 
    [e], but most de/f_initely by the [i]. A sequence of words containing those 
    vowels may facilitate naturalness of expression and articulation: “bet, bit, 
    bait, beet, ” or “bed, bid, bayed, bead. ” !en try this exercise on more or 
    less open versions of the same vowel. If very near its pitch of turning, 
    it should be possible to perform a vowel in open, turning, and turned/
    close timbres. All of these explorations will bene/f_it from some expressive 
    motivation, since expression coordinates phonation at a deep level.
    Timbral Terminology: Close or 
    Closed
    Both adjectives close /klo ʊs/ and closed /klo ʊzd/ are found in phonetic 
    literature to describe vowels with a low /f_irst formant and convergent 
    resonator shape. !ere are advantages and disadvantages with either 
    term: closed is more properly the opposite of open since close means near 
    rather than closed. On the other hand, a vowel can be more or less open, 
    but can something be more or less closed? To use an analogy, a door is 
    either open or closed. Once it is open, it can be more or less open, but it 
    can’t be more or less closed. Closed does not allow for degrees of a quality. 
    Furthermore, close /kloʊz/ can also be a verb, like open, and as such is 
    useful as a pedagogic directive.
    Physically the terms originate from the degree of closeness of the hump 
    of the tongue dorsum to the hard palate. A close vowel has the tongue 
    hump close to the hard palate, and an open vowel does not. !e tongue 
    can be closer or less close, but it doesn’t achieve any physical state that 
    could literally be called closed with vowel articulation, since with vowels 
    there is always some space between the tongue and palate for air and 
    sound to &ow out of the mouth.
    !e International Phonetic Association uses the term close /kloʊs/. 
    !is author has chosen to follow that usage, personally /f_inding it more 
    compatible with the pedagogic concept and use of degrees of closeness 
    (close, more or less closely), opening or closing a vowel further, open and 
    close timbre, and so on. Arguments can be made against close for the term 
    closed. It is hoped that this semantic diﬀerence will neither diminish 
    appreciation of the concept nor prevent its useful practical application.
    PRAA.indb   118PRAA.indb   118 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    Semantic Di/uniFB00erences119
    Open and Close
    A further conundrum exists with the terms open a n d  close, having to 
    do with their use for two diﬀerent, though related conditions: open and 
    close vowel designations and open and close acoustic registers. Open 
    and close vowels were described immediately above. Open and close 
    registers have to do with harmonic:resonance relationships, speci/f_ically 
    whether or not the second harmonic of a sound has surpassed the /f_irst 
    resonance of the vowel being sung. Paradoxically, an open vowel can be 
    sung in close timbre if the sung pitch is su#ciently high, that is, less than 
    an octave below the formant of the vowel being sung. An [a] is the most 
    open vowel but will be in close timbre above ca. F4 in most voices and in 
    whoop timbre at and above ca. F5. And [i] is the closest cardinal vowel but 
    can be in open timbre below ca. E3, again depending upon the voice type. 
    !ese relationships can be dependably, predictably charted by voice type, 
    as in earlier Figures 6.4 and 8.2, and in Appendices II & III.
    Laryngeal Register Terminology
    !is discussion has a long history! Many terms have been employed in the 
    voice science literature of the past /f_i/f_ty years: heavy and light mechanisms, 
    modal and lo/f_t, along with chest, head, and falsetto.
    Vibrational Mechanisms1 versus 
    Head and Chest
    !e most current (though not yet prevalent) designations for vocal 
    registers are:
33) Mechanism 0 for vocal fry/pulse
34) Mechanism 1 for thick vocal folds, TA involvement in vibration, 
    “chest voice” (higher contact quotient: greater than 50 percent)
35) Mechanism 2 for thin vocal folds, vocal ligament vibration, “head 
    voice” (lower contact quotient: less than 40 percent)
    PRAA.indb   119PRAA.indb   119 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  120
36) Mechanism 3 for whistle register, epithelial vibration.
    !ese designations reference declarative knowledge of the varieties of 
    vocal fold tissue physiology involved rather than the procedural knowledge 
    conveyed by the locational somatosense of vibration (head, chest). !ey 
    arise from particular muscular functions and shapings, plus aerodynamic 
    and acoustic factors. Mechanism one is thought to be TA dominant, 
    involving the vocalis muscle in its vibration. Mechanism two is thought to 
    be CT dominant, involving the vibration of the vocal ligament. Recently 
    mechanism three has been observed to only involve vibration of the 
    epithelial cover when above E6 (Titze 2025). !ese demarcations appear 
    to be due to the stretch/strain resistance of diﬀerent kinds of tissue, which 
    both facilitate and limit the frequencies at which they can be brought into 
    and sustain vibration. To some extent, the mechanisms also have attendant 
    acoustic characteristics, with thicker folds and higher contact quotients 
    having more high spectral content and buzziness, and thinner folds with 
    lower contact quotients having fewer partials and less auditory roughness. 
    In certain circumstances, toggling from one mechanism to another may 
    be triggered by destabilizing acoustic factors.
    !is author happily embraces the new terminology, especially for its 
    use in declarative discussions of the eﬀect of vibrational characteristics on 
    spectral slope and timbre. Vibrational mechanism presents as binary in 
    novice singers and tends to remain so in almost all advanced singers that 
    have been measured with EGG. !at is to say, though excellent singers 
    o/f_ten accomplish smooth perceptual aural transitions, few singers 
    accomplish an absolutely smooth, gradual shi/f_t in vocal fold shape and 
    contact quotient. However, thyroarytenoid and cricothyroid muscle 
    involvement across range is not purely binary (on/oﬀ). Both are involved 
    to varying extents in many of the vocal fold shapes we use. And there are 
    also shapes for which one or the other is mostly or entirely passive.
    !ere are some who, in their zeal for the advantages of this new 
    terminology, are rather intolerant of—even indignant toward—use of the 
    old. !is is unnecessary. Some continued use of the older terminology has 
    this in its favor: most literature prior to the recent decades used it. Unless 
    we refuse to read the historic pedagogic literature, we will at least need to 
    be able to understand and translate these terms. Furthermore, the terms 
    head and chest arose out of the real, commonly shared physical vibrotactile 
    sensations of procedural knowledge. Human perception of such 
    PRAA.indb   120PRAA.indb   120 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    Semantic Di/uniFB00erences121
    biofeedback will not disappear with new nomenclature. In that regard, the 
    terms head and chest are general enough in location to allow teachers 
    latitude in specifying locational somatosense further or not. Finally, it is 
    pedagogically useful to have terms that can be adapted to indicate degrees 
    of a quality, such as “headier” and “chestier. ” (One-ier and two-ier just don’t 
    work.) We can also add to our procedural output target descriptors the 
    registration-relevant psychoacoustic percepts, “rougher” and “smoother. ”
    Some have argued that the old terms indicate a gender bias. On the 
    contrary, we all have heads and chests and can experience related locational 
    somatosensory percepts. Only within pedagogies that strongly associate 
    one or the other with a gender, and mistakenly limit by gender the use of 
    its complement, is there potential bias. !ere is no inherent bias in the 
    words themselves, only this possible associative one, which is surely a 
    dying association. Even babies have and use both laryngeal registers. So 
    do well-trained singers of any gender identity.
    !is author anticipates and welcomes increasing usage of the 
    terminology of laryngeal mechanisms. In our acceptance of the new, there 
    is no real need either to erase or avoid historic terminology. It is a fruitless, 
    divisive battle, not worth the trouble, and not likely to be won.
    Mix and Falsetto
    Another semantic dilemma involves the terms mix and falsetto. Mix is used 
    in musical theater circles as well as in some Western classical pedagogies 
    to refer to an area of cooperation between TA and CT muscles. It seems 
    perhaps more o/f_ten to be used to describe a variant of mechanism one, that 
    is, to be TA dominant, but with less thickness or vertical phase diﬀerence 
    and with a squaring up of the opposing vocal fold vertical surfaces, which 
    facilitates ease through a lower phonation threshold pressure. !ere are no 
    new muscles involved, and therefore there is no separate mix register per 
    se, but it does seem to indicate a subtle but important acoustically induced 
    valve behavior and timbral distinction and a less heavy production. !is 
    facilitates extending the buzzier timbre of mechanism one and competent 
    vocal fold closure at higher pitches without resorting to the excessive 
    levels of transglottal pressure diﬀerence and glottal resistance that occur 
    in pressed phonation.
    PRAA.indb   121PRAA.indb   121 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  122
    Falsetto is o/f_ten understood to be a breathy version of mechanism two, 
    with a glottal gap between the arytenoids allowing air leakage and a 
    resultant weaker phonation. To others, falsetto is analogous to an e#cient 
    non-breathy mechanism two, something that some have called “reinforced 
    falsetto. ” !e migration of auditory roughness across range can be a 
    helpful metric, both for training smooth laryngeal registration as well as 
    for labeling its transitional levels. It focuses on intention and perception of 
    the output targets rather than on control of their physiologic mechanisms, 
    in agreement with the recommendations of motor learning research. If we 
    understand “chest mix” to be a lighter extension of mechanism one via a 
    migration of its auditory roughness to a less coarse buzziness, “head mix” 
    to be a version of mechanism two that has both competent closure and an 
    even more re/f_ined “sizzle, ” and falsetto to be the smooth-timbred 
    culmination of mechanism two, fully realized with no auditory roughness, 
    we might be able to overcome semantic diﬀerences and continue 
    pedagogically productive conversation.
    Belting and Yelling
    !is text refers to belting by de/f_inition as a skillful form of yelling. !is 
    is not intended to be pejorative nor to suggest that eﬀective belters are 
    just yelling in the manner found, for example, at sports events. !is is 
    essentially an acoustic observation. !e same basic acoustic strategy 
    that is employed in the yell is also employed in belting: a /f_irst resonance 
    tracking of the second harmonic. However, unskillful yelling is done at 
    injurious transglottal pressure diﬀerence and glottal resistance levels, 
    o/f_ten with noise elements that further raise health risks, both of which 
    can result in hoarseness. Well-performed belting is sustainable and does 
    not result in hoarseness or other unhealthy consequences, even with the 
    heavy performance schedules of the musical theater industry. Any high-
    energy vocalism (operatic singing included)—if done poorly, for too long, 
    within too short of a time span, and without su#cient recovery time—can 
    lead to fatigue, in&ammation, and further health issues. !ere is, however, 
    another justi/f_ication for relating belting to yelling. One of the reasons that 
    belting and its relatives in many forms of world music are so compellingly 
    expressive is precisely their natural connection to yelling. We yell in times 
    PRAA.indb   122PRAA.indb   122 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
    Semantic Di/uniFB00erences123
    of high energy, high drama, and high stakes. Belting takes full advantage of 
    that natural expressive association. Anyone who teaches healthy belting, 
    of course, must exercise great care in distinguishing that skill from raw, 
    injurious yelling. Some may prefer to use the term “call” to avoid implying 
    the rough force that can attach to the term “yelling. ” Nonetheless, from a 
    purely acoustic point of view, the main tuning factor that de/f_ines both belt 
    and yell is fR1:2fo tracking, hence their associative connection in this text 
    on vocal acoustics. Belting is, however, a modi/f_ied, skillful, and—when 
    properly done—completely healthy form of the yell acoustic strategy.
    Note
    1 Some texts use the word mode instead of mechanism. !e voice science 
    community prefers mechanism since mode has been used for other 
    aspects of vocal fold vibrational physiology (eigenmodes). I defer to that 
    preference in this edition.
    PRAA.indb   123PRAA.indb   123 7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM
    PRAA.indb   124PRAA.indb   124 7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics
    14
    Acoustic Explorations
    Exploring Vowel Turning
    !e following explorations and exercises are good for experiencing 
    the phenomenon and sensations of vowel turning with beginning 
    students as well as for re/f_ining its coordination with intermediate and 
    advanced students. Once the basic principles of tube acoustics and 
    harmonic:resonance interactions are understood, one’s creativity in 
    cra/f_ting explorations may be endless. Most of these exercises also assist 
    with exploring the dynamic laryngeal registration needed for free and 
    smooth range negotiation, since the acoustic poles of open timbre and 
    whoop timbre tend respectively to trigger full chest and full head laryngeal 
    register adjustments, and any attempted smooth movement between them 
    provides opportunities for intermediate laryngeal adjustments to occur. 
    (For examples, see Appendix 4 and http://www .kenbozeman .com/)
    Di/uniFB00erences between Treble and 
    Non-Treble Ranges
    Acoustic transitions involve relationships between the potential 
    harmonics of the sung pitch and /f_irst resonance//f_irst formant locations. 
    All of the latter lie in the treble clef, and the intervallic spread of the 
    /f_irst several harmonics signi/f_icantly reduces the number of interactions 
    treble voices will experience. Non-treble voices are primarily either in 
    open or close timbre, rarely in whoop timbre. Treble voices are mostly in 
    PRAA.indb   125PRAA.indb   125 7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  126
    Acoustic Explorations
    close timbre or whoop timbre, only occasionally in open timbre (belters 
    somewhat more). !is means that non-treble voices, which span most of 
    the bass clef and only some of the treble clef, will experience rather more 
    acoustic transitions (mini-closures and closures) than treble voices. !e 
    explorations below will therefore need to be adjusted according to range, 
    sung pitch, and formant locations. !e essential training goal is learning 
    to sense and allow appropriate migrations per vowel across range and 
    especially at these harmonic:resonance intersections.
    Beginning Explorations
    z On ascending leaps, encourage timbral depth (fronted under-
    vowel tone color), vowel closeness, and internalized aﬀects and 
    direction (such as sobbiness, empathy, mischief, skepticism, 
    suppressed laugh, or deep conviction). !e aﬀective and 
    internalized directional thoughts are meant to counter the 
    “up and out” reaching tendency that typically accompanies the 
    rising larynx of the “yell” instinct. It is also vital to allow timbral 
    migrations from low range, where the speech-level target vowel 
    tone color and generous auditory roughness (buzziness) obtain, 
    toward more of the sung vowel’s complementary tone color, a 
    smoother timbre, and the locational somatosense of higher range 
    that shi/f_ts from being mostly oral to extending both above the 
    palate and below the larynx.
    z Expressively glissando up from a buzzy open vowel on a lower 
    pitch over a large interval to a smooth close vowel (and if high 
    enough, into whoop timbre) on a high pitch to identify the poles of 
    kinesthetic and aural sensation. Tube length and laryngeal position 
    should remain passively constant across the leaps.
    z Repeat this on the same vowel across its pitch of turning, anticipating, 
    allowing, or if necessary, encouraging its passive migration (by 
    means of the suggestions in the /f_irst exploration above).
    z For the upper passaggio of non-treble voices and the lower passaggio 
    of treble voices (pitches can be adjusted as long as they span the area 
    between ca. A3 to G4) (Figure 14.1): 
    PRAA.indb   126PRAA.indb   126 7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM
    Acoustic Explorations 127
    z Explore turning over (for non-treble voices) in the lower range 
    on the close vowels  [i] and [u], which turn over well below the 
    location of the passaggio as historically understood; or explore 
    transitioning into whoop timbre (for treble voices). !is provides a 
    sensory experience of the acoustics of turning in an easier context 
    by avoiding the challenges of laryngeal registration posed by the 
    turning locations of the open vowels.
    z Speak an in&ective loop  on each vowel across its pitch of turning, 
    staying deliberately close and deep. Speech in&ection across turning 
    is initially much easier than singing across turning. Use aﬀect to 
    motivate the pitch in&ection as naturally as possible. Allow corollary, 
    spontaneous, expression-generated gestural responses as well.
    z Sing the following pattern so that the predicted pitch of turning of 
    the vowel is approximately on the third scale degree (Figure 14.2): 
    !is can also be done across the fR1:3fo crossing of more open vowels an 
    octave and a /f_i/f_th below their F1 locations, or, if range access allows, even 
    the fR1:4fo turn two octaves below their F1 locations, allowing the student 
    to explore timbral shi/f_ts and sensations that are parallel to the primary 
    turn, but in an easier part of the range (Figure 14.3). 
    Figure 14.1 Open and close vowels and open and close timbre across 
    large leaps.
    Figure 14.2 Exploration of turning over, ﬁrst by leap, then stepwise.
    PRAA.indb   127PRAA.indb   127 7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  128
    z Sing from a close vowel into a neighboring open vowel and back on 
    the same pitch, and vice versa. Use expression to maintain palatal 
    height and remain as convergent as possible on the open vowels 
    (Figure 14.4). 
    It may assist with naturalness to sing phrases containing those vowels 
    using expression:
    z “He hit me. ”
    z “Y ou would too. ”
    Other examples (with possible texts) of alternating open and close timbre 
    on the same pitch are listed below. Each example
    /ɪ/  /uni2192 /i/ /uni2192 /ɪ/ /ʊ//uni2192     /u//uni2192  /ʊ/
    Tim  eats  /f_ish. Would you  look?
    /i/ /uni2192 /e/ /uni2192 /i/  /e//uni2192 /i//uni2192  /e/
    He   ate   meat. !ey  eat  late.
    /u/  /uni2192/o//uni2192  /u/  /o/ /uni2192    /u//uni2192  /o/
    Y ou  know who. !ough you know.
    Figure 14.3 Comparing the fR1:2fo crossing of [i] with the fR1:3fo crossings 
    of [e] and the fR1:4fo crossing of [ɑ].
    Figure 14.4 Exploration of close and open timbres.
    PRAA.indb   128PRAA.indb   128 7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM
    Acoustic Explorations 129
    z Explore a repeated pitch across varying degrees of closeness/
    openness. Place examples approximately a M6 below the /f_irst 
    formant of [i] for a non-treble singer (ca. F3-G3), and just below the 
    /f_irst formant of [i] for a treble singer (ca. D4-E4):
    [i]/uni2192[ɑ]/uni2192[i]: (“We got sleepy. ”) At this pitch, the [i] will be in close 
    timbre for the non-treble voice, but on the [ ɑ] the third harmonic 
    will be below F1, making the timbre rather more open. For the treble 
    voice, the change will be from almost in whoop timbre through 
    close to open timbre and back.
    [i]/uni2192[e]/uni2192[ɑ]/uni2192[e]/uni2192[i]: !is example will span close to open to more 
    open and back for the non-treble voice and from almost whoop to 
    close to open and back for the treble voice. !e use of motivational 
    aﬀect, close articulation, and awareness of target tone color and 
    locational somatosense (Figure 11.3, p. 105) will help with timbral 
    unity across these changes.
    Intermediate Explorations and 
    Reﬁnement
    z All of the exercises below can be done an octave higher with treble 
    voices but with fewer acoustic register transitions.
    z !is exercise takes the same vowel across two degrees of openness/
    closure. Place the example so that the primary open to close timbre 
    transition is between the 5th and 8ve. !is will go from having 3 fo 
    below F1 on the /f_irst pitch, to 2fo below F1 on the second, to turned 
    over/close timbre on the top pitch, and back again (Figure 14.5). 
    Figure 14.5 Same vowel across two degrees of closure.
    PRAA.indb   129PRAA.indb   129 7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  130
    Figure 14.7 Modeling the primary acoustic register shift on the descent 
    for the subsequent ascent.
    z Sing the following rapid passage, maintaining vowel closeness and 
    depth of timbre. Front the warmer under-vowel tone color. Attempt 
    to shape the dynamics according to the syllable changes, not the 
    pitch changes, with the strongest gesture at the beginning note of 
    each syllable (beats 1 & 3), not at the upward leaps. Independence of 
    intensity and pitch change helps with dynamic laryngeal registration 
    as well as with vowel turning. Rapid passage work discourages 
    changing the vowel shape with pitch changes, promoting facile 
    turning and re-opening (Figure 14.6): 
    z First, model the timbral transition of the fR1:2fo crossing during 
    scalar descent, followed immediately by ascent on the same pitches. 
    Descending and opening through the pitch of turning is usually 
    easier and more automatic than ascending and closing. !is pattern 
    facilitates immediate and proximate sensory memory of the degree 
    of openness/closeness and passive vowel migrations for each pitch 
    of the descent from E4 to B3 as a model for each pitch in the 
    subsequent ascent from B3 to E4 (Figure 14.7): 
    Figure 14.6 Use of agility across the turn of the voice discourages tube 
    shape change.
    PRAA.indb   130PRAA.indb   130 7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM
    Acoustic Explorations 131
    z Ascend and then descend stepwise across the pitch of turning. 
    Initially position the exercise so that the second pitch is the pitch of 
    turning (transitional) and the top pitch is fully turned over. !is can 
    be done at several pitch levels to include passes that are completely 
    below turning, to those that pass through turning, to those that 
    commence already turned over and in close timbre (Figure 14.8): 
    Once the principles and locations of vowel turning are understood, 
    considerable creativity in fashioning exercises or addressing situations 
    in repertoire becomes possible. !e primary strategy being used is 
    maintaining tube length while varying the degree of openness/closeness 
    of the vowels being sung to eﬀect smoother, subtler register transitions 
    with minimal vowel migration and acceptable vowel modi/f_ication.
    Exploring the fR1:1fo Transition and 
    Tracking
    !e concept of allowing the sung pitch to ascend into and match the 
    /f_irst resonance of the vowel being sung, and therea/f_ter of raising the /f_irst 
    resonance to track the /f_irst harmonic with further pitch ascent to preserve 
    whoop timbre is simple enough. Once the singer reaches the pitch of the 
    /f_irst formant, from there on up the /f_irst resonance must be raised by vowel 
    opening in tandem with the rising pitch to maintain full resonance and for 
    bene/f_icial feedback on the vibrator. In practice, however, /f_inding the best 
    way to open a vowel is more challenging and nuanced and requires careful 
    Figure 14.8  Ascending and then descending stepwise through the 
    primary register shift.
    PRAA.indb   131PRAA.indb   131 7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  132
    guidance by an expert teacher. As the jaw is lowered further for increased 
    openness of pronunciation and to raise fR1, what exactly do the lips and 
    tongue do? !ough lip spreading is usually avoided except for the extreme 
    high range, a deadpan facial expression is not necessary for freedom or 
    resonance; rather, there may there be some expressive li/f_t in the zygomatic 
    area (pleasantly li/f_ted cheeks). Does the tongue dorsum maintain contact 
    with the upper molars in back for front vowels, and if so, how high in 
    the range? How much lip rounding can be accommodated in the upper 
    voice for the normally lip-rounded vowels? How are these changes from 
    speech shapes best motivated? All of these questions have to do with the 
    issues surrounding active vowel modi/f_ication and are especially relevant 
    for treble voices who frequently sing above the /f_irst formant locations of 
    resonant speech vowels. From an acoustic perspective—combined with 
    the pedagogic opinion of the author—maximizing resonator convergence 
    for the vowel and pitch in question to ensure the best resonator feedback 
    and assistance for the vibrator, while extending intelligibility as high as 
    comfortably possible, are appropriate goals. In pursuing these goals, the 
    singer should be guided by naturalness and pleasantness of expression 
    and appearance along with comfort and resonance of production. On 
    any given pitch, vowels can retain some visual identity relative to other 
    vowels at that same pitch, regardless of degree of openness. !ere is no 
    compelling acoustic reason for strangeness of articulation. An unforced 
    call can be used as an approximate shape guide for the appearance of 
    upper voice diction. While the instinctively exaggerated divergence of 
    “called” diction may need modi/f_ication, some diﬀerentiation between 
    vowels is still apparent until quite high. Western classical timbre will need 
    a fronted, mid-mouth sense of palatal li/f_t (rather than yawny) closer to 
    attachment to the hard palate, maintenance of tongue dorsum height for 
    F2 tuning as far as vowel and pitch will allow, and a relaxed openness of 
    throat and settled larynx below that dorsum height.
    A few explorations of the amount of mouth opening needed for fR1:1fo 
    matching and tracking are oﬀered below for mezzo and soprano voices. 
    Sopranos may /f_ind the examples more instructive starting a step higher.
    z Sing the following repeated notes, starting on a well-formed, “head-
    dominant” [e]. Glide into the subsequent [i] with tongue movement 
    only, that is, without moving the jaw at all. !e hump of the tongue 
    should be in contact with the upper molars throughout but will 
    PRAA.indb   132PRAA.indb   132 7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM
    Acoustic Explorations 133
    need to be deliberately higher on the [i]. !is exploration uses the 
    larger vertical mouth opening of the [e], whose /f_irst formant is very 
    near this pitch (C5), to guide the [i] to a better fR1: 1fo match. !e 
    tone’s locational somatosense should be within or above the hard 
    palate just above the tongue dorsum, rather than predominantly in 
    the mouth. !e [i] may take on some of the quality of an [ ʏ], but 
    ideally should still be convincing as an [i]. !e same process should 
    work for [o] to [u] and back (Figure 14.9). 
    z Next leap from an [i] a perfect 5th up to an [e] and back. Repeat, but 
    then insert an [i] a/f_ter the [e] by only changing the tongue, raising 
    the tongue dorsum to increase the dorsum:palatal narrowing, before 
    descending the 5th  back to the /f_inal [i]. !e tonal sensation should 
    be more at, behind, or above the dorsum in close and whoop timbre 
    rather than low in the mouth as it is in open timbre. !e mouth 
    shape should return to the close position of the initial [i] on the /f_inal 
    [i]. Repeat with [u] and [o] (Figure 14.10). 
    z Next leap up a perfect 5th   on an [i], opening the vowel to match 
    fR1 to 1 fo by dropping the jaw appropriately, but without losing 
    contact between the tongue and the molars, and without dropping 
    into a deadpan expression (retain a lightly pleasant expression). 
    Figure 14.9 Exploring fR1: 1fo Tracking #1 .
    Figure 14.10 Exploring fR1: 1fo Tracking #2.
    PRAA.indb   133PRAA.indb   133 7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  134
    Figure 14.12 Exploring fR1: 1fo Tracking #4.
    Concerning the latter recommendation, a singer’s default expression 
    should not be deadpan. In avoiding excessive lateral lip spreading, 
    it is not necessary to remove the subtle lip shaping that comes from 
    light facial expression. In other words, the lip muscles are relaxed 
    and not spread, but “go along for the ride” with the light expressive 
    activation of the cheeks. !is strategy assists in maintaining the 
    sensation of internal height of the tone (Figure 14.11). 
    z Finally, begin this exercise (Figure 14.12) with the [zi] appropriately 
    opened, open further as you ascend, and then close as you descend.
    Once the concept and practice is established of /f_irst allowing a vowel 
    to close into whoop timbre, and only subsequently opening it to track 
    1fo (while retaining other important articulatory aspects: a fronted, li/f_ted 
    so/f_t palate, inner smile, unconstricted throat, tongue dorsum height), 
    vowel adjustments can be made in any vocalize or in the literature 
    itself. Further attention will be needed to re/f_ine the precise manner of 
    opening for each vowel, naturalness of appearance, and to train fR1:1fo 
    tracking until it is instinctive. (See resources at kenbozeman  .c om on the 
    chiaroscuro whisper for training on how to shape for reliable resonance 
    tuning.)
    Figure 14.11 Exploring fR1:1fo Tracking #3.
    PRAA.indb   134PRAA.indb   134 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
    Acoustic Explorations 135
    !e exercise in Figure 14.12 can be pro/f_itably done on other vowels to 
    rehearse the migration into whoop timbre. Initially choose the key for 
    which the top tone of the exercise shi/f_ts into whoop: D major (starting 
    pitch A4) for [o] and [e]; F major for [ ɛ] and [ɔ]. !en start a whole step 
    higher so that the second note migrates clearly into whoop and the top 
    note tracks whoop higher. !ere should be a clear auditory and 
    somatosensory shi/f_t at the acoustic register change into whoop in which 
    the warmer complementary tone color component is sensed above the 
    palate and forward. !is shi/f_t is ideally accomplished by a conceptual 
    intention, not a muscular shape change, though it may help to 
    simultaneously allow the head to tilt slightly up and back as the sound 
    sensation shi/f_ts up and forward in order to avoid chin-tucking.
    The Use of Close [o] in Whoop 
    Timbre
    Entering and experiencing whoop timbre is fairly clear on a close [o] vowel 
    at C5 in treble voices, at which pitch an [~u]-like tone color component 
    will noticeably increase. !at warmer, darker tone color is best conceived 
    as higher, above the palate, and to the front. !e following exercise may 
    help. Use a rather close version of [o] as in a German close [o]:
    Sing an F major triad with the following text:
    F4    A4    C5    A4    F4
    So…….....you.. .kn ow….
    !e C5 should clearly shi/f_t into whoop timbre with an increase in [u] tone 
    color. Follow that with an [o] vowel melisma that tracks the same pitches, 
    sensations, and timbral migrations.
    !en sing this higher sequence:
    Ab4   C5      Eb5       C5      Ab4
    So…..you…would. .y ou…know
    !e C5 shi/f_ts into whoop with more [u] tone color, which is then tracked 
    by slight mouth opening to [ ʊ] to track whoop on the Eb5 “would, ” 
    retraces its migration, still in whoop timbre to [o] on C5, and /f_inally 
    passively migrates back to a close timbre [o] on Ab4. Follow that with an 
    PRAA.indb   135PRAA.indb   135 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  136
    [o] vowel melisma that tracks the same pitches, sensations, and timbral 
    migrations: [o u ʊ u o], mostly with passive migrations—only the Eb [ ʊ] 
    requires slight active (opening) modi/f_ication.
    Finally, sing this higher sequence:
    C5      E5      G5     E5    C5
    Y ou…would…………..too.
    !is sequence deliberately starts in whoop timbre on an [o]-shaped [u]-
    ish sound, and is subsequently tracked higher by subtle vowel opening for 
    the [ʊ] vowel of “would” as if howling. Follow that with an [o] melisma 
    that tracks the same pitches, sensations, and migrations: [o:u-ʊ-ʊ-ʊ-o:u]. 
    Motivate all three of these migration explorations with a warm, reassuring, 
    aﬀect.
    PRAA.indb   136PRAA.indb   136 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics
    15
    Corollary Strategies
    !is text is focused on practical, applied, acoustic vocal pedagogy. !ough 
    the principles presented here are vital, acoustic pedagogy will not function 
    well in a pedagogic vacuum, being but one aspect of the whole equation. 
    It is prudent for us to remember not to take part of the truth and make 
    it the whole truth. All of the things that voice teachers routinely do to 
    establish balanced poise of the body, an e#cient, responsive breath-to-
    voice connection, &ow phonation, a freely &owing vibrancy, continuity 
    and suppleness of line, and so on, continue to be necessary. Acoustic 
    pedagogy is a valuable partner in this enterprise and can facilitate vocal 
    ease through better interactive coupling of resonation with phonation. A 
    few corollary strategies worth noting in this regard are:
    Dynamic Control
    Avoid inevitable overt crescendi with pitch ascent. If an increase in 
    loudness is married to pitch ascent, then probably a corollary excessive 
    increase in pressure is as well, and some resultant movement in the 
    direction of pressed phonation. !e student should be able to maintain 
    the same dynamic level during ascending passages. !is will be easier 
    when coupled with acoustic pedagogy since a crescendo on ascent is part 
    of the yell instinct, which is primarily about making very loud sounds and 
    invites frontal over-articulation of the brighter vowel tone color. Avoiding 
    opening the vowel and/or raising the larynx at the fR1: 2fo or the fR1: 1fo 
    junctures. Instead, allowing the voice to migrate, turn over, or enter whoop 
    timbre will enable ascent without overt crescendo. Also, motivating the 
    PRAA.indb   137PRAA.indb   137 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  138
    Corollary Strategies
    ascent with some meaningful in&ection that does not require a crescendo 
    is a productive corollary strategy (see !e Use of Aﬀect below).
    Pressure Reduction
    A related strategy to counter the tendency to raise breath pressure upon 
    ascent is to use active inhalatory checking of the exhalatory forces of the 
    respiratory system during phonation, speci/f_ically by attempting more 
    expansion of the lower chest/middle of the torso to avoid increasing 
    compression of the chest. !is is done with a feeling of strong yet supple, 
    buoyant, resilient fullness in the breath supply. It is especially helpful to 
    strive for a sense of opening in the chest simultaneous with the perception 
    of a narrowing, collecting concentration of the acoustic sensation of 
    the tone when entering and traversing the passaggio. !is can best be 
    facilitated further by carefully chosen aﬀective responses, such as listening 
    with intent concern to something in the distance, or like a child’s concern 
    about what’s under the bed, both of which evoke an inhalatory, pressure-
    reducing response from the chest wall.
    Vibrancy and Flow
    Maintaining vibrancy on all pitches, so that there are no intermittent 
    straight tones in the exercises nor losses of vibrancy at the seams between 
    vowels and/or pitches, also helps avoid pressed phonation and the pressure 
    increase that accompanies it. Movement, either of the entire body or with 
    arm gestures to model the &ow and shape of the phrase, is a familiar 
    strategy to avoid holding or locking up in the respiratory/phonatory 
    connection/coordination.
    The Use of A/uniFB00ect
    Voice is motivated by expression. !is is apparently inherent and primal. 
    !e /f_irst thing a newborn does is to inhale. !e very next thing most 
    PRAA.indb   138PRAA.indb   138 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
    Corollary Strategies 139
    newborns do is to phonate, communicating quite expressively how they 
    feel about what just happened. Very few spontaneous phonations in 
    life are not caused by the impulse to communicate (exceptions include 
    sounds accompanying sneezing, coughing, throat clearing, hiccups). Not 
    only emotional quality, but also tessitura and pitch change are motivated 
    by expressive in&ection. We change pitch in&ection without planning, 
    merely by the expressive intent that is motivating our speaking. In music, 
    melodic notation is really a kind of choreography for expressive in&ection. 
    !e task of the singer is to intuit the expressive motivation that would 
    automatically result in the given melodic contour. Aﬀect can be very 
    useful in inspiring in&ective loops across the pitch of turning. In general, 
    deepening, internalizing aﬀects are most useful for ascending in&ections 
    as well as for upward melodic leaps. For example, speak the phrase, “Oh, 
    I get it, ” with an in&ective loop up and back down on the “oh, ” agreeably 
    expressing the deep realization of an epiphany. Do this while thinking 
    a close [o] and an internalized (in, above, and below) direction into the 
    body, as if “drinking the tone. ” Explore allowing aﬀect to motivate subtle, 
    spontaneous, simultaneous bodily/gestural/facial expressional responses. 
    Since expression motivates both voice and gesture, such uninhibited, 
    playful exploration can help facilitate improved acoustic and laryngeal 
    registration and su#ciently suppress the yell instinct—during the upward 
    pitch in&ections. Aﬀects that encourage greater CT involvement (i.e., a 
    lighter, “headier” laryngeal registration) as well as a favorable convergent 
    poise of the resonator also can assist upper range excursions. Examples 
    of such aﬀects are sweetness, love, reassurance, compassion, sobbiness, 
    self-pity, mischief, and self-satisfaction, most of which are in some 
    sense internalizing aﬀects. Examples of aﬀects that tend to increase TA 
    involvement are authority, con/f_idence, anger, hatred, machismo, and 
    projected egotism, that is, aﬀects that are more externally focused. For 
    a robust, yet lyric laryngeal registration, enthusiasm, joy, and hilarity are 
    motivationally helpful.
    The Problem of Micromanagement
    Like most physical coordinations, singing is not an activity that responds 
    well to micromanagement. Timbral transitions that should occur purely 
    PRAA.indb   139PRAA.indb   139 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  140
    as the result of pitch change—and the resultant changing relationships 
    between harmonics and the /f_irst resonance—ideally should not be 
    manipulated or micromanaged. !ey should feel to the singer more like 
    acoustic phenomena than like muscular phenomena. While speci/f_ic 
    awareness and attention to turning over may initially be needed to 
    overcome the yell instinct and habit, the more generalized and holistic the 
    eventual motivation, and the subtler the eﬀects of turning, the better. It is 
    o/f_ten preferable to stimulate appropriate vowel turning indirectly as a by-
    product of a diﬀerent directive or motivation, such as an increase of the 
    complementary tone color output target, aﬀect, or a directional gesture. 
    Furthermore, once a voice becomes accustomed through repetition 
    and habituation to allowing vowels to close at their predicted locations, 
    turning over need neither be volitional nor self-conscious.
    PRAA.indb   140PRAA.indb   140 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics
    16
    Laryngeal Registration 
    Revisited
    !is text is deliberately focused on voice acoustics, with minimal 
    reference to other crucial biomechanical aspects of voice pedagogy 
    (anatomy, breathing, etc.), all of which are important in their own right 
    and interact signi/f_icantly with the acoustics of production. However, 
    laryngeal registration is so directly involved in and interactive with 
    voice source acoustics, it will receive some brief attention here. From an 
    acoustic point of view, what is needed from the voice source is a clean, 
    relatively clear excitation of the vocal tract air column with a spectral slope 
    appropriate to the range and dynamic level required for the situation. !e 
    singer must also be capable of traversing the range without perceptibly 
    abrupt changes in the source spectral slope, even when crossing from 
    one vibrational mechanism to another, such as from “chest” to “head. ” 
    Acoustic interaction and feedback are o/f_ten involved in smoothing these 
    transitions, but we should /f_irst consider the necessary muscular valve 
    adjustments themselves.
    Muscle Action
    A prominent theory postulates that the two primary, mutually antagonistic 
    muscular functions of the larynx that shape and tauten the vocal folds—
    the shortening, thickening TA ’s and the lengthening, thinning CT’s—
    cooperate in an overlapping middle range to achieve a smooth “baton 
    exchange” by very gradually shi/f_ting the proportions of their involvement, 
    PRAA.indb   141PRAA.indb   141 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  142
    Laryngeal Registration Revisited
    all while the muscles that approximate the vocal folds typically maintain 
    competent, comfortable closure. !ough perceptually smooth register 
    transitions are heard in performances of excellent singers, a perfectly 
    smooth transfer of muscle activity, in which one group tapers involvement 
    gradually down to zero, has rarely been measured. !ere is almost always 
    a point at which a binary toggle from greater to thinner vocal fold 
    contact is measurable, even when accomplished essentially inaudibly. 
    !ere is probably an aerodynamic or acoustic factor at play that triggers 
    this observable change. Nevertheless, it is both an important goal and a 
    fruitful strategy to practice absolute perceptual smoothness of laryngeal 
    registration across range.
    Downstream Resistors and  
    Semi-Occluded Vocal Tracts
    One eﬀective approach to smoothing range negotiation is to glissando 
    across the entire range using some helpful downstream resistor or semi-
    occluded vocal tract articulation. A downstream resistor is any articulator 
    position or function that requires or resists air&ow and is downstream 
    from the vocal folds, that is, nearer to or at the lips. If the resistor is a 
    vibrator, like a tongue or lip trill, it will require steady air&ow and pressure 
    to maintain oscillation. !e vocal folds must allow enough &ow through 
    the glottis to be in balance with the downstream resistor, whose semi-
    occlusion generates a back pressure that bene/f_icially reduces the upstream 
    transglottal pressure diﬀerence. A semi-occluded articulation at or near 
    the lips or at the dorsum/palatal narrowing can increase inertive reactance, 
    lowering the phonation threshold pressure (the amount of pressure needed 
    to bring the vocal folds into vibration). Either strategy reduces pressed 
    phonation. Downstream resistors or semi-occluded articulations that can 
    be used in glissandi for smoothing laryngeal register shi/f_ts include:
37) Tongue trills
38) Lip trills/raspberries/blubbering
39) Phonating through a short straw
40) A buzzy hum or buzzing through a lightly bite-held lower lip 
    (modi/f_ied [v])
    PRAA.indb   142PRAA.indb   142 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
    Laryngeal Registration Revisited 143
41) “Kazooing” through a tiny [w] or fricative [β] (“puﬀy cheeks”)
42) Open-mouthed [ŋ] or other nasal consonants such as [n m]
    Motivating Laryngeal Stability
    With any of these glissandi, care should be taken to facilitate a &exible, 
    comfortable stability in which the larynx does not rise appreciably when 
    approaching the primary register transition zone (ca. B3-G4). !is can 
    be helped by motivating the phonation in that transitional range with 
    expressive in&ection or with aﬀects that stabilize the throat shape and 
    laryngeal depth, such as:
43) Self-pitying whimper
44) “Up to no good but pleased with yourself ” mischief
45) Suppressed laughter
46) Sobbiness
47) Hilarity
    !ese aﬀects can apparently be done rather strongly without the risk of 
    injury or even of muscle rigidity. As with yawning, these aﬀective actions 
    are physically self-limiting, with muscles working in supple antagonism to 
    inherent tissue elasticity. !ough the student may be instinctively inclined 
    to relax aﬀective positioning when opening for the upper range, resonance 
    and vocal tract structural poise are better served by strengthening the 
    aﬀect with ascent as occurs “in the wild. ” !e expressional migration of 
    aﬀect motivates pitch change.
    Laryngeal Registration Goals
    !e goals of laryngeal registration are a clean, clear, light voice source 
    “buzz” that migrates from buzzier to smoother throughout the entire 
    compass, with no pressure surges, minimal pressure increase, and with a 
    stable larynx and throat space. Maintaining throat poise when ascending 
    through the zona di passaggio  may need to be more deliberate . Since 
    semi-occluded exercises are not executed on open-mouthed vowels, they 
    PRAA.indb   143PRAA.indb   143 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  144
    moderate some of the acoustic eﬀects that might otherwise destabilize 
    register transitions. !is allows the focus of attention to be exclusively on 
    the smoothness and ease of a voice source that is acoustically organized 
    across the range.
    Glissandoing on a vowel poses more challenges but would be the next 
    step a/f_ter downstream resistors. It is usually easier to glissando on naturally 
    convergent vowels, such as [i], provided the mouth is opened gradually 
    and su#ciently to formant track 1 fo a/f_ter arrival in whoop timbre for 
    pitches above fR1. All vowels will necessarily migrate in timbre across range 
    with an increase in the vowel’s complementary tone color relative to its 
    identifying target tone color. !e complementary tone color for most 
    vowels is the lower, /f_irst formant contribution, which adds a warming, 
    rounding, and possibly neutralizing element. Language targets, originating 
    at speech range, cannot be aggressively maintained without risking higher 
    pressure and glottal resistance levels. Nonetheless, intelligible diction is 
    possible for most voices surprisingly high. Pitches sung above the treble 
    clef will have reduced vowel de/f_inition options.
    The Use of Nasalance
    !e use of a subtle amount of nasalance can assist with training laryngeal 
    register transitions across range, at least in SOVT vocal explorations. 
    Nasalance broadens and weakens the intensity of the /f_irst resonance and 
    the percentage of its resultant warming, rounding, /f_irst formant tone 
    color contribution (Sundberg et al. 2016). !is has two eﬀects: a weaker 
    /f_irst resonance reduces its potential to acoustically destabilize phonation 
    at laryngeal register shi/f_ts; its weakening also creates the impression 
    of strengthening the timbral singer’s formant cluster contribution, 
    brightening the overall timbral mix percept. !ough smooth laryngeal 
    registration can be successfully negotiated and trained without the use 
    of nasalance, judicious use of it in early training can be a very bene/f_icial 
    exploratory strategy. Its persistence in the /f_inished product of unampli/f_ied 
    singing is controverted as potentially compromising overall power (Perna 
    2020) and risking an undesirable percept of actual nasality.
          PRAA.indb   144PRAA.indb   144 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
          Practical Vocal Acoustics
          17
          Instructional Technology
          As mentioned in the introduction, instructional technology is now 
          readily available, inexpensive, and rather user-friendly. Each application 
          or program does take some training to understand its most appropriate 
          uses. Other texts have written more extensively on this, but this chapter 
          will give a summary of two instruments and their use.
          The Madde Voice Synthesizer
          !roughout this text, explorations using the Madde [m ɑdːə] voice 
          synthesizer have been recommended to illustrate both aurally and visually 
          various aspects of vocal acoustics. !is author considers Madde to be a 
          most helpful tool for vocal acoustics explanations ( Figure 17.1 ). It is a 
          free shareware product from Swedish engineer Svante Granqvist and is 
          programmable to represent any voice type on any vowel singing any pitch 
          within a standard keyboard. Madde clearly displays both harmonics  (with 
          numbered lines) and formants (with shaded bands) above a keyboard, 
          an especially musician-friendly feature. !is format provides the 
          simplest, most direct way to model and explain to students the eﬀects of 
          harmonic:resonance interactions so crucial to acoustic vocal registration. 
          Madde can also be useful for occasional explanations in the studio and 
          even for audio demonstrations of harmonic:resonance interactions and 
          the passive vowel migrations that accompany them, but it is especially 
          well-suited for voice pedagogy classes. Madde can be used to illustrate 
          (1) the eﬀect of the sung pitch on the number of harmonics available for 
          resonation per primary audible range, (2) the roll-oﬀ (tilt) in power of the 
          PRAA.indb   145PRAA.indb   145 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
          Practical Vocal Acoustics  146
          Instructional Technology
          source harmonics, (3) the eﬀect of the presence or absence of resonances/
          formants, and (4) the aural eﬀects of all harmonic:resonance interactions.
          Limitations of Madde
          Madde and Modes of Phonation
          Madde can roughly model diﬀerent vibrational mechanisms (head or 
          chest) by varying the tilt or “roll-oﬀ ” of the voice source (see Appendix 1: 
          Madde Exploration 2) and, to some extent, modes of phonation (pressed, 
          breathy, &ow). However, since the voice source input of harmonics in 
          Madde is always “clean” or noise-free, it cannot accurately model breathy 
          phonation, which typically has an air-noise element. Since no muscles are 
          involved in its voice source, neither can it really model all of the timbral 
          changes that accompany pressed phonation.
          Madde and Non-Linearity
          Madde is strictly linear (non-interactive) and therefore cannot model 
          the eﬀects of non-linearity on the voice source or on resonation. In other 
          Figure 17 .1 Madde voice synthesizer, displaying voice source harmonics 
          (numbered lines) and formants (shaded bands) just above the keyboard.
          PRAA.indb   146PRAA.indb   146 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
          Instructional Technology 147
          words, the resonances/formants one programs do not cause changes in 
          the source input—as can happen in a human voice—but merely selectively 
          resonate its harmonic spectral content.
          Madde and Vibrato
          Since Madde’s programmed vibrato cycles—though adjustable in rate 
          and extent—are essentially uniform, audible pitch undulations are more 
          apparent and distracting than in a real voice with an ideal vibrato. With 
          actual voices, minute waveform variability can help to create a perceptual 
          “singleness of pitch, ” if rate and extent parameters are within certain limits. 
          !at is to say, a tone can be consistently vibrant (have measurable, regular 
          frequency undulations) without perceivable pitch undulation. Bear in mind 
          that pitch is not the same as frequency. It is the term for our perception of 
          frequency. In a real voice, if the vibrato frequency is close to six per second 
          and the extent (excursion above and below the target frequency) is a semi-
          tone or less, while we perceive that something is moving, the pitch sounds 
          stable and steady rather than wobbly or tremulous. One student described 
          his perception upon hearing an ideal vibrato as “movement within the pitch 
          rather than movement of the pitch. ” !is is analogous to our perceiving a 
          smoothly moving picture when, in fact, twenty-four still frames per second 
          are &ashed on the screen in the theater. Perceptual and actual phenomena 
          diverge. Madde does not replicate this “singleness of pitch” phenomenon.
          In spite of these few limitations, because of its musician-friendly keyboard 
          display and general excellence of design, Svante Granqvist’s Madde voice 
          synthesizer is an outstanding instructional tool—one of the best available to 
          date—for acoustics presentations/explanations for undergraduate voice 
          pedagogy classes or for any audience. It is recommended that you download 
          and use Madde for the explorations described in this text for the best 
          understanding of the principles and sounds being discussed. Madde can be 
          downloaded to PCs or to Macs that can handle Windows applications from 
          the following site:
          http://www .tolvan .com1
          Spectrography
          !e instructional technology that is the simplest to read and so far the 
          most useful for the voice studio is real-time spectrography . Real-time 
          PRAA.indb   147PRAA.indb   147 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
          Practical Vocal Acoustics  148
          means that the analysis is simultaneous and the image display immediate—
          essentially as the sound is happening, that is, in real-time. Spectrography is 
          an analysis of sound that isolates the frequency components of the sound 
          and displays them on the vertical dimension, with higher frequencies 
          lying higher across the graph, and lower frequencies lying lower. Time 
          moves horizontally across the graph, with the present instant entering on 
          the right edge of the screen and then scrolling to the le/f_t. Saved images are 
          then read from le/f_t (earliest sound) to right (most recent sound). A third 
          dimension—the intensity or power of the frequency components—is 
          displayed on a color or darkness scale. Of all the ways we analyze and graph 
          sound, so far, the spectrographic image is visually the most analogous to 
          sound over time, and therefore the most approachable, understandable, 
          and even intuitive for students. With minimal initial explanation, students 
          can both see and hear important characteristics of their singing in the 
          playback, leading to productive commentary or discussion. !is author 
          experimented with real-time spectrography starting in 1989 and had the 
          privilege of using spectrography in his voice studio from 1993 until 2019. 
          It was as ever-present as the mirror on the wall and was referred to at a 
          comparable rate—that is, only as needed and when helpful.
          VoceVista
          Real-time spectrography is readily available from various sources in 
          various forms, including the deservedly popular VoceVi sta Video Pro  
          program, developed by Donald Miller, Harm Schutte, and their research 
          team in Groningen, Netherlands, and managed and updated by engineer 
          Bodo Maas. (Figure 17.2). If the program’s analysis parameters are set to 
          display a narrow frequency bandwidth (see De/f_initions), which is the 
          default setting for Voce Vista, individual harmonics of the fundamental 
          frequency are modeled and easily seen &owing horizontally across 
          the screen, and therefore characteristics of vibrato and vocal line can 
          be monitored and evaluated. While broad bandwidth  settings more 
          accurately model the individual impulses of the voice and show vocal 
          tract formants even more clearly, formants are usually reasonably 
          apparent with the narrow width default settings, especially for low and 
          mid-range pitches, such that overall resonance and resonance balance  
          can also be monitored with them. Durational parameters can be set to 
          PRAA.indb   148PRAA.indb   148 7/10/2025   4:38:59 PM7/10/2025   4:38:59 PM
          Instructional Technology 149
          save short segments of time for near immediate retrieval, listening, and 
          viewing. Continuity and consistency of vibrancy, brevity of consonantal 
          interruption, and consistency of resonance balance, among other things, 
          can be readily seen and heard on playback.
          Power Spectra
          If more detailed display or research is needed, a power spectrum  
          display, and even electroglottography  (EGG) can be used (both 
          available with VoceVista). Power spectra display power or intensity 
          on the vertical and frequency (spectrum) on the horizontal. Unlike 
          spectrography, which graphs segments of time on the horizontal, power 
          spectra usually only graph an instant (either the present instant or an 
          instant selected from a saved spectrograph) of time. Power spectra can 
          therefore show formants, harmonics, and their relative strengths in 
          great detail ( Figure 17.3 ).
          Figure 17 .2 VoceVista real-time spectrography, with frequency on the 
          vertical, time on the horizontal, intensity on the color scale, and the 
          pressure waveform displayed above.
          PRAA.indb   149PRAA.indb   149 7/10/2025   4:38:59 PM7/10/2025   4:38:59 PM
          Practical Vocal Acoustics  150
          Electroglottography (EGG)
          Electroglottography is a charting of the amount of glottal contact in 
          each vibratory cycle, from which a closed quotient (percentage of time 
          the glottis is closed), contact quotient (amount of glottal contact), and 
          laryngeal register can be postulated. Data is collected by means of a small 
          electric current passing between two electrodes placed one on either side 
          of the larynx. !e greater the conductivity between them, the greater the 
          vocal fold contact. Chest voice has greater vocal fold contact and a larger 
          contact quotient than head voice. !erefore, one can—roughly at least—
          estimate vibrational mechanism from the contact quotient.
          !ough EGG signals can give very speci/f_ic information about laryngeal 
          registration and its coordination with acoustic factors, both of which are 
          essential in ongoing research, it is not yet clear that what electroglottography 
          adds is su#ciently crucial to application to be necessary for regular weekly 
          lesson use. For more information on EGG (as well as for any matters of 
          vocal resonance), this author highly recommends Donald Miller’s 
          Figure 17 .3 VoceVista with waveform (top left), spectrograph (bottom 
          left), and power spectrum (right) displayed. The vertical time cursor on 
          the left selects the moment being displayed on the power spectrum. The 
          short horizontal frequency cursor on the spectrograph (the third harmonic 
          from the bottom) becomes the vertical cursor on the power spectrum.
          PRAA.indb   150PRAA.indb   150 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
          Instructional Technology 151
          Resonance in Singing.  (See Selected References). Suggested uses of 
          VoceVista in the studio will be addressed below.
          Studio Uses of Voce Vista
          VoceVista is a powerful, well-designed tool for voice analysis and research. 
          As argued earlier, real-time spectrography—which is available from various 
          sources including VoceVista—is currently the most intuitively analogous way 
          to graph a number of pedagogically relevant sound characteristics visually. 
          With frequency on the vertical, time on the horizontal, and intensity on 
          the color or brightness scale, its display is understandable and readable by 
          students a/f_ter minimal training. Very practical matters of vocal line are readily 
          apparent: continuousness and consistency of vibrancy, dynamic shaping, 
          duration of any interruption of the tonal &ow, and at least in a general sense, 
          timbral balance. !is author therefore has real-time spectrography running 
          essentially continuously in lessons as the standard technology for playback. 
          If a more detailed look at the relative strength of harmonics is needed, 
          a screen display that includes power spectrum can be selected. A power 
          spectrum typically displays one instant of time, with power (intensity) on the 
          vertical and frequency (spectrum) on the horizontal. VoceVista very handily 
          coordinates the spectrograph display with the power spectrum display so 
          that one can scroll through the time dimension of the spectrograph and 
          examine each instant in detail on the power spectrum.
          Spectrographic display is best for assessing:
48) Vibrancy (immediacy, consistency, continuity)
49) Vocal line (tonal and general timbral continuity)
50) General sense of overall resonance
51) General presence and strength of the singer’s formant cluster
    !ings that spectrography is not best suited for include:
52) Close comparisons between fairly similar vowels (power spectra 
    are better).
53) Subtle timbral distinctions.
54) Determining which sounds are correct (your trained ear decides. 
    !e picture may or may not show evidence, depending upon the 
    nature and degree of diﬀerence).
    PRAA.indb   151PRAA.indb   151 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Practical Vocal Acoustics  152
55) Best laryngeal height (your ear, eye, and the student’s freedom of 
    function are better).
56) Precise resonance:harmonic interactions (power spectra and your 
    ear are better).
    !at said, the audio playback of VoceVista that accompanies the visual 
    display is good enough to “complete the picture” of most issues being 
    discussed. Ultimately, it is the sound—and accompanying freedom and 
    comfort of sensation—that determine the success of the singing being 
    evaluated. Spectrography doesn’t tell you what is good, bad, or indiﬀerent. 
    It simply displays what is. !e teacher and student look, listen and discuss 
    to determine what the sounds and the graph are re&ecting.
    Note
    1 Unfortunately at publication date, Madde no longer works with every PC 
    operating system, nor with Mac computers.
    PRAA.indb   152PRAA.indb   152 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions
    Absolute spectral tone color: the characteristic of individual frequencies 
    to be perceived by humans as having a speci/f_ic vowel-like quality, relative 
    height, and relative darkness or brightness. For example, low-frequency 
    harmonics have a dark [~u]-like quality; high frequencies have a bright 
    [~i]-like quality. Vowels are perceived to be a combination of the absolute 
    spectral tone colors of the harmonics being reinforced by the /f_irst and 
    second resonances of the vocal tract and featured as the /f_irst and second 
    formants in the radiated sound. !is approximation of a vowel quality is 
    indicated by a tilde plus the vowel. (Howell 2016)
    Acoustic coupling: coupling of a vocal tract resonance with a source 
    harmonic.
    Acoustic registration: the timbral transitions that occur as a result of 
    resonance:harmonic interactions. All acoustic register events involve 
    harmonic interactions with the /f_irst resonance. Many also involve 
    interaction with the second resonance.
    Acoustic registers: vocal registers due exclusively to relationships between 
    acoustic parameters, speci/f_ically the harmonics of the fundamental 
    frequency relative to the /f_irst resonance of the vocal tract. See: open timbre 
    (voce aperta), close timbre (voce chiusa), and whoop timbre.
    Active vowel modi/f_ication: a change in the vowel quality accomplished 
    by moving the vowel formants from their normal speech locations by 
    means of changes in the shape of the vocal tract in an attempt to /f_ind 
    better (more resonant) resonance:harmonic matches.
    Aﬀect: emotive expression, important for the spontaneous motivation 
    and organization of voice and the maintenance of the pharyngeal poise 
    necessary for vocal tract stability across range and vowels.
    PRAA.indb   153PRAA.indb   153 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 154
    Antinode: see pressure antinode.
    Articulation: in speech and singing, the shaping or tuning of the vocal 
    tract to modify the /f_iltered voice source signal; articulation also includes 
    how the tongue, lips, jaw, and other speech organs are involved in the 
    production of speech sounds.
    Aryepiglottic exit:  the mouth of the epilarynx, formed by the tissues 
    connecting the epiglottis with the arytenoids. A narrowing of the 
    aryepiglottic exit is associated with a boost in upper partials from the 
    voice source. Along with other perturbations further downstream along 
    the vocal tract, it is part of the resonance strategy of the singer’s formant 
    cluster in unampli/f_ied Western classical singing and possibly also of the 
    ring or twang of belt production.
    Auditory roughness:  the psychoacoustic percept of buzziness due to 
    closely clustered (usually harmonic) frequencies, that is, frequencies a 
    minor third or less apart (harmonics ( 6fo). Auditory roughness migrates 
    from rough low to smooth high across range, register, and voice type, 
    and is associated with laryngeal registers: rough with “chest voice, ” an 
    intermediate sizzle with “mix, ” and smooth with “head voice. ”
    Bandwidth: a tube resonance has a certain frequency range contour; that 
    is, it will reinforce frequencies on either side of its peak frequency response, 
    covering a range of frequencies. If the contour of the resonance is a tall, 
    narrow peak, it has a narrow bandwidth with higher potential intensity. 
    If its contour is rounder, it has a broad bandwidth  with less potential 
    intensity. Brass instrument resonances have very narrow bandwidths and 
    will therefore only pass speci/f_ic harmonics of a given tube through but 
    with higher intensity. Vocal tract resonances and formants typically have 
    wider bandwidths, allowing more voice source harmonics through on 
    either side of the peak formant frequency.
    Belting: a singing style with a mechanism one dominant laryngeal 
    registration, prioritizing the extension of a bright, speech-like timbre 
    higher, using an acoustic strategy in which the /f_irst resonance tracks the 
    second harmonic; in other words, a kind of skillful yelling or calling. 
    Some form of belting is prevalent in many forms of popular, folk, and 
    world music and in American musical theater.
    PRAA.indb   154PRAA.indb   154 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 155
    Belt mix: a delayed (higher) version of close timbre, in which the second 
    harmonic of the voice source lies between the /f_irst and second resonances, 
    and the second resonance highlights a higher source harmonic, enabling 
    the singer to extend a belt-like, bright timbre into the top of the treble clef 
    and above.
    Breathy phonation: (see Mode of phonation)
    Chesty: (see Laryngeal register)
    Chiaroscuro: an Italian term meaning “bright-dark” or “clear-dark” 
    borrowed from art history to describe an ideal resonance balance between 
    low and high-frequency components in Western classical singing. It is 
    usually accomplished (in middle and lower ranges) by some balance in 
    power between the /f_irst formant and the singer’s formant cluster. Also 
    termed chiaroscuro balanced resonance.
    Closed Quotient: the average percentage of time the glottis is closed 
    during one vibratory cycle. A large closed quotient would usually indicate 
    a chestier laryngeal register with a short, thick vocal fold shape (vibrational 
    mechanism one). A smaller closed quotient would usually indicate a 
    headier laryngeal register with a long, thin vocal fold shape (vibrational 
    mechanism two). (See Contact quotient)
    Close: as a verb, to close; an acoustic concentration of the sound that occurs 
    when a source harmonic, particularly the second harmonic, surpasses the 
    /f_irst vocal tract resonance. Also called covering or turning over.
    Close timbre: a vocal quality and acoustic register in which the second 
    harmonic has risen above the /f_irst resonance peak or /f_irst formant, causing 
    the voice to seem to “turn over. ” Also termed voce chiusa in Italian. Belt 
    “mix” is a variant of close timbre.
    Close vowel: a vowel with a low /f_irst formant, such as [i] and [u], and an 
    inherently convergent resonator shape.
    Closed phase: the portion of a periodic glottal cycle during which the 
    glottis is closed and air&ow is zero.
    PRAA.indb   155PRAA.indb   155 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 156
    Contact quotient: the degree of vocal fold tissue in contact in a given 
    vibratory cycle. A large contact quotient would usually indicate a chestier 
    laryngeal register with a short, thick shape (vibrational mechanism one). 
    A smaller contact quotient would usually indicate a headier laryngeal 
    register with a long, thin shape (vibrational mechanism two). !ough 
    related to closed quotient, it is possible to have a high contact quotient 
    without complete glottal closure, or a high closed quotient (duration 
    of closure) without deep contact, but it is more typical to have a high 
    closed quotient when there is a high contact quotient. EGG displays 
    contact quotient reliably, from which closed quotient may be less reliably 
    inferred.
    Contemporary Commercial Music (CCM): popular music genres other 
    than Western classical.
    Convergent resonator: a vocal tract shape, which for the vowel being 
    produced is relatively more open near the glottis and narrower near the 
    lips (like an inverted megaphone). Such a resonance strategy is typical of 
    unampli/f_ied Western classical singing and voce chiusa.
    Coup de glotte: a clean, gentle glottal onset, in which the vocal folds close 
    immediately prior to phonation; the most e#cient, expressive way to 
    onset phonation; advocated by Manuel Garcia.
    Cover: the timbral shi/f_t corollary to the ascending fR1:2fo crossing, also 
    termed “turning over” or “closing, ” and causing a more internal and less 
    “exposed” timbral and somatosensory percept.
    Cricothyroid muscles (CT): (see Laryngeal register)
    Declarative knowledge: the relatively objective, measurable, quantitative 
    knowledge of physical realities, such as vocal physiology and acoustics. 
    Such knowledge is available to scienti/f_ic investigation and clear, 
    straightforward articulation. (see Procedural knowledge.)
    Depth: a description of the timbre of a sound that has signi/f_icant strength 
    in one of its lowest harmonics, as resonated by the /f_irst resonance and 
    featured as the /f_irst formant.
    PRAA.indb   156PRAA.indb   156 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 157
    Divergent resonator: a description of a resonator shape that is smaller in 
    the pharynx and more open nearer the lips. Open vowels are inherently 
    divergent in shape. !is resonance strategy is more typical of musical 
    theater as well as many world music singing styles.
    Downstream resistor: any articulator position or device that resists 
    air&ow to some extent that is downstream from the vocal folds, that is, 
    nearer to or at the lips. Downstream resistors share the pressure load from 
    the lungs with the vocal folds, necessitating higher air&ow through the 
    glottis, reducing the transglottal pressure diﬀerence, thus discouraging 
    pressed phonation. (See also Semi-occluded vocal tract)
    Electroglottography (EGG): a charting of the amount of glottal contact 
    in each vibratory cycle, from which a closed quotient (the percentage 
    of time the glottis is closed) and laryngeal register can be postulated. 
    Data is collected by means of a small electric current passing between 
    two electrodes placed one on either side of the larynx. !e greater the 
    conductivity between them, the greater the vocal fold contact. Chest 
    voice (mechanism one) has greater vocal fold contact and a larger contact 
    quotient than head voice (mechanism two).
    Epilarynx, epilaryngeal tube: the short tube formed by the epiglottis 
    and the aryepiglottic folds and arytenoids just above the vocal 
    folds. !e epilarynx forms a small tube within the larger tube of the 
    laryngopharynx. Narrowing of the aryepiglottic opening (the exit of the 
    epilarynx) increases acoustic reactance and boosts higher frequencies. It 
    is surrounded by the piriform sinus spaces and valleculae, both of which 
    create anti-resonances.
    Fach: a German term for speci/f_ic voice categories, such as soubrette 
    soprano, Heldentenor, Verdi baritone, and so on, which are determined 
    by the tessitura capacity, vocal “weight, ” and timbre of a voice. !e overall 
    location of vocal tract formants, as well as the speci/f_ic location of the 
    singer’s formant cluster are signi/f_icant factors in determining quality and 
    therefore the Fach of a singer.
    Filter function: the characteristic of the vocal tract sound transfer function 
    to selectively prefer and pass some frequencies through over others, and 
    PRAA.indb   157PRAA.indb   157 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 158
    of the periodic vocal fold oscillation to reinforce those frequencies in sync 
    with its periodicity.
    First formant: the lowest radiated spectral peak of a voice, typically C4 
    or above. Most /f_irst formants lie in contact with the treble clef and cover 
    about one octave from the lowest of an [i] to the highest of an [a].
    Flow phonation: (see Mode of phonation)
    Formant: a frequency peak in the radiated spectrum, caused by a natural 
    resonance of the vocal tract, that is, by a standing wave of the quarter-
    wave resonator.
    Vowel formants: the /f_irst (lowest) two formants are the most easily tunable 
    and also span the range of all relevant vowel-like tone colors; therefore, 
    they are the most signi/f_icant in de/f_ining the vowel quality of a sound. 
    Together they are called the vowel formants.
    Singer’s formant cluster (SFC): a clustering of formants three and above 
    (usually formants 3–5) generated by a low larynx, open laryngopharynx, 
    narrowed epilaryngeal tube exit, and various additional perturbations 
    along the vocal tract length, that results in an increase in power in the 
    high-frequency components of a sung sound. It is especially characteristic 
    of non-treble voices in Western classical singing, enabling them to carry 
    over orchestral accompaniment.
    Formant detuning: the tuning of a resonance frequency peak away from 
    a harmonic to weaken its eﬀect. Used with F2 in the upper range of treble 
    voices to reduce shrillness and with F1 in non-treble voices and some 
    CCM aesthetics, such as belting, to avoid whoop timbre on close vowels.
    Formant tracking: the tuning of a resonance to follow or track a speci/f_ic 
    harmonic, such as fR1:1fo tracking of whoop timbre (upper treble voice 
    strategy) or fR1:2fo tracking of the yell or belting.
    Formant tuning: the tuning of one or both of the /f_irst two resonances in 
    order to /f_ind a better resonance:harmonic match and formant radiation 
    for more e#cient output.
    PRAA.indb   158PRAA.indb   158 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 159
    Front-back vowel designation: a description either of a physical 
    articulatory characteristic (a fronted tongue dorsum-palatal-narrowing 
    versus a tongue hump further back), or of an acoustic characteristic (a 
    sound with a high second formant and therefore stronger high partials, 
    i.e., a front vowel; or a low second formant and therefore weaker high 
    partials and potentially stronger low partials, i.e., a back vowel).
    Fullness: a typical descriptor of a sound with signi/f_icant strength in its 
    lowest harmonics, as featured by the /f_irst resonance as the /f_irst formant. 
    Other similar terms are: depth, warmth, roundness.
    Fundamental frequency (1fo): the lowest harmonic of a sound (previously 
    H1), more or less equivalent to the perceived pitch.
    Harmonic: a frequency component of a periodic sound. Harmonic 
    frequency components are either the lowest component (the fundamental 
    frequency) or whole integer multiples of the lowest frequency component. 
    Together, they generate a pressure waveform that repeats at the frequency 
    of that lowest common denominator.
    Harmonic to noise ratio (HNR): the percentage of periodic to aperiodic 
    spectral content in a sound. A “pure” pitch percept arises from sounds 
    that have a high HNR, that is, those that contain only or mostly harmonic 
    frequencies. !e lower the HNR, the noisier the sound percept.
    Headier: a tone with a steeper spectral slope and smoother timbral 
    percept; therefore, associated with “head voice” or mechanism two. (See 
    laryngeal register)
    Heavy Cover: deliberate lowering of fR1 (by tube lengthening and vowel 
    closing) to below 2fo to precipitate the turning over of the voice. Strategies 
    used include lowering the larynx, lip rounding and/or trumpeting, and 
    vowel darkening.
    Helmholtz resonator:  a hollow enclosure having a smaller opening 
    consisting of such dimensions that the enclosure resonates at a single 
    frequency determined by the relative dimensions of its space and opening: 
    the larger the space and smaller the exit, the lower the frequency.
    PRAA.indb   159PRAA.indb   159 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 160
    Inertive reactance: a sluggishness of air molecule movement created by 
    resonator convergence, which can improve resonator interactivity with the 
    vibrator by reducing the transglottal pressure diﬀerence, glottal resistance, 
    and phonation threshold pressure.
    Intensity: the power of a sound measurable in decibels; the physical 
    correlate to perceptual loudness.
    Laryngeal register: the muscular adjustment of the vocal folds; the 
    relative participation of the thyroarytenoid (TA—shortening, thickening) 
    muscles and the cricothyroid (CT—stretching, thinning) muscles.
    Chesty: historic description of a sound assumed to be TA dominant, with 
    shorter, thicker, looser vocal folds, and which has a shallower spectral 
    slope with more strong, high harmonic component frequencies, and a 
    buzzier timbre. Now called vibrational mechanism one.
    Cricothyroid muscles (CT): the muscles, which upon contracting stretch 
    and thin the vocal folds for higher pitches. !ey are mostly situated outside 
    of the larynx and tilt the laryngeal cartilages to stretch the vocal folds. !ey 
    are responsible for what has historically been called “head” or “falsetto” 
    register (now vibrational mechanism two ), with its thinner vocal fold 
    contact, fundamental frequency dominance, and smaller number of 
    harmonics.
    Heady: historic description of a sound assumed to be CT dominant, with 
    thinner, longer, tauter vocal folds, and which has a stronger fundamental, 
    a steeper spectral slope, fewer and weaker high harmonic component 
    frequencies, and a smoother timbre. Now called vibrational mechanism 
    two.
    /T_hyroarytenoid muscles (TA): the muscles, which upon contracting 
    shorten and thicken the vocal folds for lower pitches. !ey comprise the 
    body of the vocal folds and are responsible for what has historically been 
    called “chest” register (now vibrational mechanism one), with its thicker 
    vocal fold contact, vertical phase diﬀerence , and larger number of 
    harmonics.
    Linear source-/f_ilter model: an earlier model of vocal resonance that was 
    sequentially, chronologically linear; that is, that postulated a power source 
    (breath) providing air&ow to a vibrator (the vocal folds), bringing them 
    into vibration, generating a voice source signal (sound wave) containing 
    PRAA.indb   160PRAA.indb   160 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 161
    harmonics, which are then selectively resonated by a /f_ilter (resonator; the 
    vocal tract), which then transfers the /f_iltered harmonics to the outside 
    world through the lips. (See non-linear source-/f_ilter model.)
    Locational somatosense: the perceptual location of sensation of a sound; 
    historically referred to as “placement. ” Sound sensation migrates across 
    range from predominantly oral on low pitches to increasingly internal, 
    above the palate, and into the torso with ascent.
    Maximum Flow Declination Rate: the rate of reduction of air&ow volume 
    of the glottal impulses from peak (maximum) &ow to zero or baseline 
    &ow; the more rapid the declination, the stronger the high-frequency 
    content of the voice source excitation.
    Mechanism one: a vibrational mode of the larynx in which the vocal fold 
    shape is short and thick, the vocal fold cover loose, and in which the TA 
    muscle is involved in the vibration. It has a vertical phase diﬀerence , 
    generating more and stronger high partials. It is caused by greater TA 
    laryngeal muscle participation. (See Laryngeal register)
    Mechanism three: a vibrational mode of the larynx in which the vocal 
    fold shape is long and thin, the vocal fold cover is taut, eventually involving 
    epithelial vibration. However, the vocal folds may not be fully adducted 
    nor vibrate along their full length.
    Mechanism two: a vibrational mode of the larynx in which the vocal 
    fold shape is long and thin, the vocal fold cover is taut, involving vocal 
    ligament vibration. It has little vertical phase diﬀerence , resulting in 
    a more sinusoidal pressure wave that is more fundamental frequency 
    dominant. It is caused by greater CT laryngeal muscle participation and 
    usually passive TAs. (See Laryngeal register)
    Mechanism zero: a vibrational mode of the voice source in which the 
    vocal fold shape is short and thick, and the vocalis muscle and vocal fold 
    cover are loose. Also called pulse or vocal fry register.
    Mode of phonation: a way of categorizing the ratios of the three elements 
    of phonation: breath pressure (the transglottal pressure diﬀerence), 
    PRAA.indb   161PRAA.indb   161 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 162
    air&ow (through the glottis), and glottal resistance (vocal valve closure 
    force). Although these can vary along a continuum, they can be modeled 
    by representative numbers in a phonation equation as follows: breath 
    pressure/air&ow = glottal resistance. One of three ratios of pressure, &ow, 
    and glottal resistance in phonation: breathy (excess air&ow: 1/ 2 = 0.5); 
    pressed (excess glottal resistance or glottal closure force: 1/0.5 = 2); &ow 
    (a balance between pressure, &ow, and resistance: 1/1 = 1). (Not to be 
    confused with vibrational mechanism; see Laryngeal registration above.)
    Breathy phonation: a phonation equation model with excess air&ow, such 
    as 1/2 = 0.5 would be termed breathy phonation.
    Flow phonation: a phonation equation model with an ideal balance for a 
    given situation would be 1/1=1, and is termed &ow phonation.
    Pressed phonation: a phonation equation model with excess glottal 
    resistance, such as 1/0.5 = 2 would be termed pressed phonation.
    Narrow frequency bandwidth: see Bandwidth.
    Nasalance: using a (usually) slight opening of the velopharyngeal port 
    to divert and allow a small percentage of air&ow and sound through 
    the nares. Nasalance broadens the bandwidth of the /f_irst resonance, 
    weakening its intensity. A broader, weaker fR1 reduces potential interactive 
    interference with laryngeal register transitions and the percentage of tone 
    color contributed by the /f_irst formant, thus brightening the timbre.
    Necessary roughness: a perception of buzziness caused by high, closely 
    clustered and resonated spectral content. Frequencies less than a m3 
    apart beat against each other to human hearing perception, introducing a 
    buzziness or sizzle to the timbral percept.
    Node: see pressure node.
    Non-linear source-/f_ilter model: a source-/f_ilter model of vocal resonance 
    with the added component of possible interactivity between the /f_ilter 
    and the source, such that certain resonation postures of the /f_ilter cause 
    feedback on the vibrator that alters the function and contribution of the 
    vibrator, ideally by assisting its e#ciency.
    PRAA.indb   162PRAA.indb   162 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 163
    Openness-closeness dimension:  descriptions of a vocal sound relative 
    to the frequency location of its /f_irst formant and the relationship of its 
    harmonics to its /f_irst formant. (See Voce chiusa, Close timbre, Close vowel, 
    and Voce aperta, Open timbre, Open vowel)
    Open timbre: a vocal sound in which two or more harmonics are at or 
    below the /f_irst formant of the vowel being sung. Also termed voce aperta 
    in Italian. Sometimes also used to describe a generally divergent resonance 
    shape strategy.
    Open vowel: a vowel with a high /f_irst formant, such as [ɑ], and an 
    inherently divergent resonator shape.
    Overtones: a designation for frequency components of a sound that lie 
    above the fundamental frequency. Overtones usually refer to harmonic 
    frequencies. !e /f_irst overtone is the second harmonic.
    Over-vowel tone color: the vowel-like spectral tone color tuned by the 
    second resonance of the vocal tract and featured by the radiated second 
    formant. Its pitch ranges from the top of the treble clef to just into the top 
    octave of the keyboard. In isolation, it has the spectral tone color range of [~ɔ 
    ɑ a æ ɛ ɪ e i]. As such, it is usually the target tone color of the intended vowel.
    Partials: another term for frequency components of a sound; partials may 
    also refer to non-harmonic frequencies, that is, frequencies that are not 
    multiples of the lowest frequency component.
    Passaggio: Italian for passage or transition into the upper voice.
    Primo passaggio: the lower entry into the transition zone.
    Secondo passaggio:  the upper exit of the transition zone, entry into the 
    upper voice.
    Zona di passaggio: the transition zone, a range segment of about a 4th or 
    5th in non-treble voice singers, during which it is thought that the laryngeal 
    registration should shi/f_t from a TA dominant mechanism one to a lighter 
    mechanism one with greater CT participation. In treble voice registration 
    this transition area is longer and is sub-divided into a lower middle and 
    upper middle, during which the voice transitions into CT dominant 
    vibrational mechanism two.
    PRAA.indb   163PRAA.indb   163 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 164
    Passive vowel migration, passive vowel modi/f_ication: this author’s 
    proposed designations for a change in vowel quality accomplished 
    by retaining the vocal tract shape but moving the pitch with its subset 
    of harmonics. !e change in vowel quality results from the changing 
    relationships and interactions between the stable resonances and the 
    moving harmonics. (See Vowel modi/f_ication.)
    Perturbation /T_heory: a theory modeling the vocal tract as a quarter-
    wave resonator whose frequency responses (resonances) can be retuned 
    by local perturbations (changes of dimension: narrowings or widenings) 
    near pressure wave nodes or antinodes.
    Pharyngeal voice:  a vocal production typically utilizing the thin vocal 
    ligament of mechanism two with enhanced vocal fold closure, pharyngeal 
    narrowing, a shallow spectral slope, and a peculiarly bright timbre. Also 
    called “witch voice” ( voce di strega ). Used to train the bridge between 
    mechanisms one and two and ease of upper voice phonation.
    Piriform Sinuses (Fossae): the small side branches of the lower pharynx 
    on either side of the laryngopharynx, which create an anti-resonance in 
    the 4000–6000 Hz region, highlighting the singer’s formant cluster just 
    below (2000–4000 Hz).
    Pitch: our perception of the frequency of a sound. It is the frequency of 
    the composite pressure pattern of multiple harmonic frequencies of a 
    tone. !ough derived from processing the /f_irst /f_ive to eight harmonics 
    of a tone, in most practical circumstances, it can be considered to be the 
    psychoacoustic equivalent of the fundamental frequency.
    Pitch of turning: the pitch at which a voice turns over, just inside of an 
    octave below the pitch of the /f_irst formant of the vowel being sung. !e 
    pitch at which the 2fo crosses above the fR1 of the vowel being sung.
    Power spectrum: an analysis of sound that displays power on the vertical 
    axis and frequency components on the horizontal axis.
    Pressed phonation: (see Mode of phonation)
    PRAA.indb   164PRAA.indb   164 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 165
    Pressure antinode:  a point of maximum pressure variation within an 
    average pressure level context.
    Pressure node: a point of minimum pressure variation within an average 
    pressure level context.
    Pressure waveform: the pattern of air pressure variations (compressions 
    and rarefactions) that form a sound. If there is a regular, periodically 
    repeating pattern, the sound will have a clear pitch. If there is no regularly 
    repeating pattern, but rather random pressure variations, the sound will 
    be perceived as noise.
    Primary acoustic register transitions: prominent acoustic registration 
    events at the point at which 2fo crosses fR1, transitioning from open to close 
    timbre, and the point at which 1 fo intersects fR1, attaining whoop timbre. 
    Re/f_ining these two events is a major goal of Western classical singing 
    pedagogy for non-treble and treble voices, respectively. !e former is 
    most o/f_ten associated with the turning over of the open vowels in the 
    neighborhood of C4-G4 in non-treble voices. !e latter is the preferred 
    strategy for the upper middle range of Western classical treble voices.
    Primary laryngeal register transition: the shi/f_t from chest to falsetto, 
    or vibrational mechanism one to vibrational mechanism two. Non-
    treble classical singers tend to avoid this shi/f_t, staying in some form 
    of mechanism one for the entire range. Treble classical singers tend to 
    shi/f_t from mechanism one to mechanism two between C4 and G4, 
    usually before or by the fR1:2fo acoustic register transition. Belters extend 
    mechanism one or chest register to ca. C5.
    Primo passaggio: see passaggio.
    Procedural knowledge: the subjective, sensorial knowledge of motor 
    behavior, what it feels like to do the thing; the goal of motor learning for 
    skillful function; in short, the automated basis of ability. Being subjective 
    and sensorial, procedural knowledge is challenging to articulate but is 
    essential for intentional, skillful physical activity of any kind.
    PRAA.indb   165PRAA.indb   165 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 166
    Quarter-wave resonator: a resonator that is a tube open at one end 
    and closed at the other. Such a resonator can establish standing waves 
    (resonances) at the quarter-wavelength and odd-numbered multiples of 
    that length: 3/4 wavelength, 5/4 wavelength, 7/4 wavelength, and so on, 
    that is, wavelength segments with nodes and antinodes at opposite ends of 
    the tubular resonator. !e vocal tract is a form of quarter-wave resonator, 
    but with more variable, tunable wavelengths.
    Reactance: a matching of resistance between the glottis and the vocal 
    tract or epilarynx that increases the interactivity of the system (feedback 
    on the vibrator).
    Resonator convergence: an overall downstream narrowing of the vocal 
    tract shape from a relatively open area near the glottis to a narrowing 
    nearer the lips.
    Resonance: Resonance is the tendency of an object or system to respond 
    (oscillate) more strongly and longer to particular frequencies introduced 
    into it. A vocal tract resonance is one of several potential peak frequency 
    responses of the vocal tract to acoustic input.
    Real-time spectrography: an ever-changing, immediately current 
    analysis and visual representation of sound that displays frequency on the 
    vertical, time on the horizontal, and intensity on the gray or color scale. 
    !is form of sound display is currently the most intuitive and informative 
    as a visual learning aid for students.
    Roll-oﬀ: the drop in intensity of harmonics above the /f_irst harmonic; 
    typically indicated in decibels per octave (dBs/octave). Called “Tilt” on 
    the Madde synthesizer. Also termed spectral slope.
    Secondo passaggio: see passaggio.
    Semi-occluded vocal tract (SOVT):  a vocal tract with a location or exit 
    su#ciently narrowed to generate &ow resistance or acoustic impedance. 
    A short thin straw is one mechanical example. A very small, kazoo-like 
    [w] is an articulatory example. (See also downstream resistor.) SOVT 
    exercises are used to rebalance pressure, &ow, and resistance levels, 
    reducing transglottal pressure diﬀerence and glottal resistance.
    PRAA.indb   166PRAA.indb   166 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 167
    Singer’s formant cluster: (see Formant)
    Somatosense: the body’s perceptual feel of a phenomenon or behavior, 
    such as the somatosense of a sung sound.
    Spectral envelope: an outline of the power dimension of a power spectrum. 
    It is useful for revealing the resonance characteristics (formants) of a 
    particular vocal tract shape.
    Spectral slope: the rate at which higher frequency spectral content of the 
    voice source or the radiated sound weakens in intensity per octave.
    Spectral tilt: another name for spectral slope.
    Spectrum: a chart of the frequency content of a sound, usually with 
    frequency on the horizontal axis and intensity on the vertical axis.
    Spectrography: a spectrograph displays frequency on the vertical axis, 
    time on the horizontal axis, and power on a gray or color scale. It is 
    perhaps the most accessible display of sound for studio use.
    /T_hyroarytenoid muscles (TA): (see Laryngeal register)
    Transfer function of the vocal tract:  the capacity of a particular shape 
    of the vocal tract to transfer sound energy from the glottis to the outside 
    world, which capacity varies preferentially by frequency, resulting in 
    “peaks and valleys” of frequency response.
    Transglottal pressure diﬀerence: the diﬀerence in pressure between the 
    average subglottal (tracheal) and supraglottal air pressures. !e transglottal 
    pressure diﬀerence determines the necessary glottal resistance level and 
    resultant vocal fold collision force. A comfortably low transglottal pressure 
    diﬀerence is therefore essential to maintaining healthy vocal fold tissue.
    Transient model of voice acoustics: a time and pressure dominant model 
    of voice acoustics in contrast to the frequency-dominant source-/f_ilter 
    model. !e transient model more accurately portrays the way in which 
    the complex pressure waves of voice are actually generated.
    PRAA.indb   167PRAA.indb   167 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 168
    Turning over: a term descriptive of the passing of 2fo above fR1 of a vowel 
    when ascending, and its accompanying sound and somatosense.
    Twang: a (controverted) term descriptive of a bright, edgy quality used in 
    CCM genres, accomplished by various pharyngeal narrowing strategies. 
    Associated by some more with Country Music vocal style, but used in 
    music theater belt and other styles as well.
    Under-vowel tone color: the vowel-like spectral tone color tuned by the 
    /f_irst resonance of the vocal tract and featured by the /f_irst formant. Its pitch 
    range largely overlaps the treble clef, and therefore in isolation has the 
    spectral tone color range of [~o-u] but in context is usually perceived as 
    mixed with the tone color of the second formant over-vowel.
    Valleculae: spaces between the epilarynx and the back of the tongue. Like 
    the piriform sinuses behind the epilarynx, open valleculae create a high-
    frequency anti-resonance. Hence, closing them increases timbal ring.
    Valsalva maneuver:  a forceful compression of the thorax (ribcage), 
    similar to eﬀortful elimination, childbearing, and heavy li/f_ting. If resisted 
    by glottal closure, it stimulates excessively strong glottal resistance and 
    should not be used in singing.
    Vertical phase diﬀerence : a diﬀerence in the timing of opening and 
    closing of the vocal folds’ vertical contact. It is caused by thicker vocal 
    folds whose contact area opens and closes at its lower margins ahead of 
    the opening and closing of its upper margins.
    Vocal ligament: the intermediate layer of the three-layer vocal fold 
    structure: the epithelial mucosal cover, the vocal ligament, and the vocalis 
    (thyroarytenoid) muscle body. Vocal fold vibrational load shi/f_ts from the 
    full body in mechanism one to the vocal ligament in mechanism two to 
    the epithelial layer in mechanism three.
    Vocal tract /f_ilter: the tube resonator comprised of the vocal tract from the 
    glottis to the lips. !is resonator “/f_ilters” spectral partials passing through 
    it, strengthening some and weakening others to create the vowels and 
    timbre of the sound radiated from the lips.
    PRAA.indb   168PRAA.indb   168 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 169
    Vocal tract resonances: potential peak frequency responses of the vocal 
    tract /f_ilter function to acoustic input.
    Voce aperta: open timbre; any sung sounds in which two or more 
    harmonics are at or below the /f_irst resonance//f_irst formant—in other 
    words, the timbre of any pitches sung an octave or more below the /f_irst 
    formant of the vowel being sung. !is term has also been used historically 
    to describe an overall divergent resonator shape characterized by a timbre 
    in which vowels can tend to widen and move into yell timbre.
    Voce chiusa: close timbre; any sung sounds in which the second harmonic 
    is above the /f_irst resonance//f_irst formant—in other words, the timbre of 
    any sung pitches less than an octave below the /f_irst formant. !is term 
    has also been used historically to describe an overall convergent resonator 
    poise that results in the chiaroscuro timbre of Western classical singing, in 
    which vowels close when and where they should relative to vowels’ /f_irst 
    resonance/formant locations, in contrast to a predominantly divergent, 
    open timbre resonator adjustment.
    Voice source: the sound signal produced by the excitation of the air 
    column in the vocal tract by the abrupt closure of the glottic valve (vocal 
    folds). Each such closure introduces a noise spectrum with a theoretically 
    in/f_inite number of frequencies that excite the transfer function of the 
    vocal tract. !us, both the vocal tract and the vocal folds cooperate in 
    generating the voice source of a single impulse, which is then /f_iltered 
    further—by the periodic reiteration of that pulse—for frequencies in sync 
    with its fundamental frequency, that is, harmonic frequencies.
    Vowel designations: close or open (due to low or high /f_irst formant 
    locations), front or back (due to high or low second formant locations) 
    categorizations.
    Vowel formants: (see Formant)
    Vowel integrity: maintaining acceptable vowel identity even when vowel 
    modi/f_ication is necessary; avoidance of vowel distortion.
    PRAA.indb   169PRAA.indb   169 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Deﬁnitions 170
    Vowel migration: the inevitable, gradual migration or change of timbre 
    of vowels across range, due to frequency-dependent spectral tone color 
    and the changing interactions of frequencies with vocal tract resonances.
    Vowel modi/f_ication: historically understood to refer to a change in the 
    vowel quality accomplished by moving the vowel formants from their 
    normal speech locations by means of changes in the shape of the vocal 
    tract in an attempt to /f_ind better (more resonant) resonance:harmonic 
    matches. !is text proposes the subcategories: active and passive vowel 
    modi/f_ication. (See Passive vowel modi/f_ication)
    Whoop timbre: the timbre of a sung sound that is dominated by the tone 
    color of its fundamental frequency. Whoop timbre occurs when the sung 
    pitch approximately matches (and is tracked by) the frequency of the 
    /f_irst resonance and is therefore prominently featured in the radiated /f_irst 
    formant: a fR1:1fo coupling. It begins to appear from the mid-treble clef, 
    especially in treble voices. Since the fundamental frequency in that range 
    has an [~u], [~o], or [~ɔ]-like tone color, whoop timbre is round, domed, 
    and “whoop” or “hoot” like and is associated with head voice or M2.
    Y ell coupling, yell timbre: an acoustic coupling of fR1 and 2fo that has been 
    carried higher than normal through tube shortening and mouth widening 
    (fR1:2fo tracking); bright and o/f_ten pressed and spread in quality.
    Zona di passaggio: transition zone. (See passaggio)
    PRAA.indb   170PRAA.indb   170 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
    Abbreviations
    Abbreviations
    A4, B3, C5, etc.: pitch designations by octave with A4 corresponding to 
    440 Hz and C4 corresponding to middle C.
    CCM: Contemporary Commercial Music; designation of vocal styles 
    other than Western classical, o/f_ten electronically ampli/f_ied.
    CT: Cricothyroid muscle
    fo, 1 fo: the fundamental frequency or lowest frequency component of a 
    periodic sound (the same as H1).
    F1, F2, F3, etc.: formants resulting from the vocal tract /f_ilter function. !e 
    vocal tract is a resonator with multiple natural resonances, resulting in 
    radiated spectral peaks called formants that are numbered from lowest to 
    highest. 
    1fo, 2 fo, 3 fo, etc.: harmonic frequency components of a periodic sound 
    having “pitch”: “one times the fundamental oscillation; two times the 
    fundamental frequency oscillation, ” and so on; more simply stated, /f_irst 
    harmonic, second harmonic, third harmonic, and so on. Formerly labeled 
    H1, H2, H3, and so on.
    IP A: International Phonetic Alphabet. IPA symbols for vowels appear in 
    the following form in this text: [ɑ].
    M0, M1, M2, M3: vibrational mechanisms of the vocal folds, corresponding 
    roughly to the historic terms pulse, chest, head, and whistle.
    SFC: Singer’s formant cluster, a clustering of formants three and 
    higher.
    TA: !yroarytenoid muscle
    PRAA.indb   171PRAA.indb   171 7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM
    Appendix 1
    Appendix 1
    Madde Explorations
    Madde Exploration 1: 
    The Unresonated Voice Source
    Check the “Show formants/partials” box (bottom right just above the 
    keyboard). Uncheck the formants boxes (upper le/f_t, labeled F1[Hz], 
    F2[Hz], F3[Hz], etc.). Activate a set of harmonics by clicking on a pitch 
    on the keyboard at or below middle C (middle C4 is marked with a black 
    dot). Y ou will see a set of numbered lines, representing the harmonics 
    of the pitch you selected, just above the keyboard. (See Figure 18.1 .) 
    Activate the play arrow (top le/f_t). !is will approximate the pitched buzz 
    of an unresonated set of harmonics as it might sound if exposed in open 
    space. Y ou will probably want to deactivate this unattractive sound fairly 
    quickly.
    Madde Exploration 2: The E/uniFB00ect of 
    Mode of Phonation and Range on 
    Source Harmonics
    Deactivate the formant boxes as you did for Madde Example 1. To 
    experience the eﬀect of laryngeal register on the voice source, adjust the 
    Tilt [dB/oct] level in the Source spectrum area (upper right) by clicking 
    in the tilt box and using the up and down arrows on your keyboard. !e 
    Tilt represents the roll-oﬀ in power per octave of the harmonics. !e 
    larger the negative number, the greater the tilt. !e default Tilt is set for 
    Appendix 1
    PRAA.indb   172PRAA.indb   172 7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM
    Appendix 1 173
    Appendix 1
    a roll-oﬀ of 6 decibels per octave (i.e., -6). A “headier” tone would have a 
    steeper roll-oﬀ (try -12). A pressed tone would have a shallower roll-oﬀ  
    (try -3). (!is author advises against trying positive tilt numbers, at least 
    not with formants deactivated.) ( Figure 18.2) 
    Activate the play arrow (top le/f_t) for each of these. !e steeper the tilt 
    or roll-oﬀ, the milder the source will sound since it will have weaker high 
    harmonics. Since these higher frequencies are precisely where our ears are 
    the most sensitive to intensity, the signal will also sound quieter at steeper 
    tilts (-12), and louder (and more annoying!) at shallower tilts (-3). Y ou 
    will again want to deactivate the sound.
    In order to see the eﬀect of pitch on the number of available harmonics, 
    click on successively higher pitches up to soprano high C (C6). !e Madde 
    keyboard will only show three harmonics at that pitch, since the top C 
    (C8) is missing from its keyboard display. It is dramatically clear that high 
    sopranos face a rather diﬀerent resonance challenge/situation than a non-
    treble voice faces.
    Figure 18.1 Madde voice synthesizer, with vocal tract formants unchecked, 
    showing and playing an unresonated harmonic frequency set.
    PRAA.indb   173PRAA.indb   173 7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM
    Appendix 1  174
    Madde Exploration 3: Formant 
    Resonation of Source Harmonics; 
    Harmonic:formant Crossings
    Make sure the “Show formants/partials” box (bottom right just above 
    the keyboard) is checked. Check the formants boxes (upper le/f_t, labeled 
    F1[Hz], F2[Hz], F3[Hz], etc.). Y ou will notice a red band appearing for 
    each formant just above its frequency center on the keyboard. Y ou can set 
    the formant frequencies for various voice types and vowels. For example, 
    bass baritone formants for an [e] vowel might be set as follows: F1 440; F2 
    1400; F3 2200; F4 2500; F5 2800. Set those and play the scale C3 D3 E3 F3 
    G3. If you continue playing, you may notice timbral changes as harmonics 
    pass through formants (visible just above the keyboard), especially through 
    formant one (more on that later). Y ou will certainly notice that harmonics, 
    once resonated by the vocal tract, are rather more pleasant than with the 
    formants removed. Other vowels can be modeled by varying the frequencies 
    of the /f_irst two formants (more on that later).
    Figure 18.2 Madde voice synthesizer Tilt function (in the Source spectrum 
    box, upper right-hand side): Tilt reﬂects source roll-off. Steeper tilt or 
    roll-off (a higher negative value) models a headier laryngeal registration. 
    Shallower tilt or roll-off (a small negative value) models a chestier laryngeal 
    registration.
    PRAA.indb   174PRAA.indb   174 7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM
    Appendix 1 175
    Madde Exploration 4: Open and 
    Close Timbre
    Make sure the “Show formants/partials” box (bottom right just above the 
    keyboard) is activated. Use the bass baritone formant settings for an [e] 
    vowel of Exploration 3, Figure 18.3. !e /f_irst formant for this example 
    is set at A440. Try the following explorations: Play pitches that lie more 
    than an octave below F1 to experience open timbre. Play an ascending 
    scale starting on C3 an octave below middle C. Y ou may notice a timbral 
    “closure” when 3fo rises through F1, that is, from ca. C3 to E3, and even 
    more prominently when 2fo rises through F1, from G3 to B3, the primary 
    turning of the voice (Figure 18.4). 
    Madde Exploration 5: Whoop 
    Timbre and Beyond
    Make sure the “Show formants/partials” box (bottom right just above the 
    keyboard) is activated. Use the bass baritone formant settings for an [e] 
    Figure 18.3 Formants of the vocal tract set for an [e] in a bass voice.
    PRAA.indb   175PRAA.indb   175 7/10/2025   4:39:02 PM7/10/2025   4:39:02 PM
    Appendix 1  176
    vowel as in Example 3, 4 above. !e /f_irst formant for this example is set at 
    A440. Continue with the following explorations:
1. Ascend stepwise from C4 without adjusting the formants. !e 
   implication of leaving the formants the same is that the “singer” 
   is not changing his vocal tract (throat/vowel) shape at all. As 
   1fo approaches F1, the timbre will become increasingly close 
   until full whoop timbre is achieved at the F1:1fo juncture at A4. 
   Notice that this rather falsetto/feminine timbre was achieved 
   with no adjustment to the Source spectrum Tilt, therefore no 
   source change, rather was accomplished entirely by changing 
   harmonic:/f_ilter interactions, that is, entirely through changes 
   in resonance. !e implication is that source changes (laryngeal 
   registration changes) are not necessarily required for this timbre. 
   It must be noted, however, that in a human subject, source changes 
   are likely to accompany these resonance changes.
2. If you continue to raise 1 fo above F1 (A4), what is now a counter 
   tenor “whoop” timbre will quickly thin, demonstrating the 
   necessity of formant tracking above this point.
   Figure 18.4 An exploration of turning over, the primary acoustic register 
   transition of a voice, when 2fo rises above F1.
   PRAA.indb   176PRAA.indb   176 7/10/2025   4:39:02 PM7/10/2025   4:39:02 PM
   Appendix 1 177
3. Have the synthesizer “sing” D5. Click on the F1[Hz] box. 
   Repeatedly click the up arrow on your computer keyboard, 
   gradually raising the F1 frequency until it matches D5 (until the 
   red F1 band joins 1fo on the pitch D5). Y ou will notice that timbral 
   fullness/depth will return.
4. Click the keyboard down arrow to return F1 to A440 and deactivate 
   the sound (Figure 18.5). 
   Further Madde Explorations
   Modeling Exercises and Vocalizes
   Any of the exercises listed above (see Exploring Vowel Turning, p. 125 
   and Exploring F1:1fo Transition and Tracking, p. 131) can be modeled on 
   Madde to demonstrate an approximation of the passive vowel migrations 
   that accompany the primary F1:2fo crossing, or any secondary crossings 
   (F1:3fo, F1:4fo, etc.) and the timbral fullness of F1:1fo tracking.
   Figure 18.5 1fo rising above F1 will cause thinness of timbre.
   PRAA.indb   177PRAA.indb   177 7/10/2025   4:39:02 PM7/10/2025   4:39:02 PM
   Appendix 1  178
   F1/F2 Map
   Vowels can be more &uidly modeled and changed by selecting “Show 
   F1/F2 map” under the Settings menu. A chart will display with F1 on the 
   horizontal dimension and F2 on the vertical. Clicking and dragging the 
   cursor on this map will manipulate F1 and F2 locations, even while the 
   “voice” is activated. !is capability will allow exploration not only of 
   vowels, but also of opening and closing vowels by modifying a vowel to 
   move its /f_irst formant across the 2fo of the pitch being “sung. ” (Figure 18.6) 
   Modeling Student Voices
   If a student’s formants (from a comfortable part of the range) are derived, 
   perhaps by using VoceVista, the student’s voice can be modeled in Madde 
   for further exploration. For example, the passive vowel modi/f_ications of 
   a non-treble singer’s primary register transition on various vowels can 
   be modeled. While it is not usually necessary to model a speci/f_ic voice 
   to begin to understand passive modi/f_ication, it may be helpful for some. 
   More o/f_ten a generic model of the same voice type will su#ce. Also, fR1:1fo 
   tracking of treble voices can be convincingly demonstrated, and their 
   resultant necessary active vowel modi/f_ications.
   Figure 18.6 F1/F2 map (Vowel Formant Map).
   PRAA.indb   178PRAA.indb   178 7/10/2025   4:39:03 PM7/10/2025   4:39:03 PM
   Appendix 2
   Appendix 2
   Approximate F1 
   Locations by Voice
   Why Approximate First Formant 
   Locations?
   !e chart on the following page gives approximate /f_irst formant locations 
   by general voice type. !e formant boxes are deliberately non-speci/f_ic 
   (covering more than one pitch) for several reasons: general voice types 
   have varieties of subdivisions that accommodate some variety of vocal 
   tract length, which overlap with adjacent voice types and subdivisions. 
   For example, a high lyric baritone may have formants that are higher than 
   those of a Heldentenor, or a deeper mezzo-soprano may have formants 
   that are lower than those of a leggiero tenor. Voices are individual, as are 
   their formant locations. However, /f_irst formant locations will not vary 
   very far from the approximate locations given, and the general contour of 
   formant locations from vowel to vowel will be relatively stable. One could 
   use VoceVista to identify speci/f_ic spoken formants or formants of vowels 
   sung near speech range if speci/f_icity is desired. However, the teacher’s 
   ear and the ease and e#ciency of vocal function are usually su#cient for 
   re/f_ining the locations of acoustic registration events. Once a teacher knows 
   approximate locations by voice type, the passive vowel modi/f_ications that 
   accompany these events, and strategies to encourage timbral consistency 
   (i.e., tube stability) across these events, the student’s vocal function will 
   guide further adjustments.
   PRAA.indb   179PRAA.indb   179 7/10/2025   4:39:03 PM7/10/2025   4:39:03 PM
   Appendix 2  180
   Appendix 2
   Approximate F1 Locations by Voice
   See www .kenbozeman .com
   or https://faculty .lawrence .edu /bozemank /664 -2/ 
   Figure 19.1 Approximate ﬁrst formant locations. 
   PRAA.indb   180PRAA.indb   180 7/10/2025   4:39:03 PM7/10/2025   4:39:03 PM
   Appendix 3
   Appendix 3
   Events Surrounding 
   the Lower Passaggio
   See www .kenbozeman .com or
   https://faculty .lawrence .edu /bozemank /644 -2/ 
   Figure 20.1 Acoustic events surrounding the lower passagio. 
   PRAA.indb   181PRAA.indb   181 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
   Appendix 4
   Appendix 4
   Recorded Exercise Examples
   http://www .kenbozeman .com /appendix -4-- -video -contents .php
   !ese sample explorations were made in the year of the /f_irst edition 
   publication with available undergraduate students at various levels 
   of development. While they model the acoustic phenomena being 
   discussed reasonably well, neither they nor the author would claim that 
   they represent singers whose training was completed. !e author is very 
   grateful for their willingness to serve as models for educational purposes.
   Exploring Vowel Turning (see Chapter 14, p. 125)
   Example 1. Leaps across the turn
   Example 2. Leaping and stepping across the turn 
   Example 3. Levels of turning
   Example 4. Repeated note from close to open to close
   Example 5. Same vowel across multiple levels
   Example 6. Turning with agility
   Example 7. Descending and ascending through the turn
   Example 8. Ascending and descending through the turn
   Exploring fR1:1fo Transition and Tracking (see Chapter 14, p. 131)
   Example 9. Repeated note
   Example 10. Leap up to open vowel, repeated to close vowel
   Example 11. Leap up on same vowel
   Example 12. Stepwise Ascent and Descent
   PRAA.indb   182PRAA.indb   182 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
   Appendix 5
   Appendix 5
   YouTube Examples
   (Available at: http://www .kenbozeman .com)
   !ere is inherent risk in citing Y ouTube examples, including the potential 
   instability of the cited locations. At the time of this printing, these cited 
   locations had been stably available for a number of years. !eir educational 
   value overruled the author’s concerns about their potential instability. 
   Most of the recordings cited can also be found in other formats. (Y ouTube 
   titles in bold.)
   Example 1: Leontyne Price “Beim Schlafengehen” Strauss’ Vier Letzte 
   Lieder
   https://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =ItAmRzPTEdY &t =590s
   Example 2: Nicolai Gedda canta Rachmaninov II
   http://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =AFa9hgb0tmI &t =2m50s
   Example 3: José Van Dam sings Kaddish by Ravel
   http://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =IAiWPrhxlpc &t =3m45s
   Example 4: Jussi Björling, Ah, Love But A Day
   Piano version: https://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =WCElu55 _Efc
   Orchestral version: Jussi Björling sings “ Ah Love, but a day”
   http://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =4TWoHdA085g &t =0m23s
   Example 5: Jussi Björling—“Ombra mai fu”—Atlanta 1959
   https://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =pyHaucoWd4Q &t =112s
   Example 6: George London sings Schubert—“ An die Musik”
   https://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =YUxZlDekIk4
   PRAA.indb   183PRAA.indb   183 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
   Appendix 5  184
   Appendix 5
   Example 7: Pavarotti about covered sound
   https://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =3JIVs9FZ8sQ
   Example 8: How to sing bel canto 2/2 (see 0:30–1:15):
   http://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =XPplK22nSXY &t =0m30s
   Example 9: How to sing bel canto 1/2 (see 3:14–3:55):
   https://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =3nH54BdqWpg &t =194s
   Example 10: Rockwell Blake describes dark timbre and
   passaggio ./f_l v
   (Unfortunately, Example 10 is no longer available)
   PRAA.indb   184PRAA.indb   184 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
   Selected References
   Selected References
   Austin, Stephen F . 2005. “!e Voce Chiusa. ” Journal of Singing, 61 (4): 421–5.
   Ballantyne, Chadley, and Melissa Malde. 2025. “Sensation, Kinesthesia, Body 
   Mapping and Teaching Singing. ” In Graham F . Welch, David M. Howard, 
   and John Nix (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Singing, Second ed. New Y ork: 
   Oxford University Press.
   Bourne, T., M. Garnier, and D. Kenny. 2011. “Music !eater Voice: 
   Production, Physiology and Pedagogy. ” Journal of Singing, 67 (4): 237–44.
   Bozeman, Kenneth. 2007. “ A Case for Voice Science in the Voice Studio. ” 
   Journal of Singing, 63 (3): 265–70.
   Bozeman, Kenneth. 2008. “On the Voice: Registration Strategies for Training 
   the Male Passaggio. ” Choral Journal, 48: 59–72.
   Bozeman, Kenneth. 2010. “!e Role of the First Formant in Training the 
   Male Singing Voice. ” Journal of Singing, 66 (3): 291–7.
   Bozeman, Kenneth. 2012a. “ Acoustic Passaggio Pedagogy for the Male 
   Voice. ” Logopedics Phoniatrics Vocology, 38 (2): 64–9
   Bozeman, Kenneth. 2012b. “New Technology for Teaching Voice Science 
   and Pedagogy: !e Madde Synthesizer (Svante Granqvist). ” Journal of 
   Singing, 68 (4): 415–18.
   Bozeman, Kenneth. 2021. Kinesthetic Voice Pedagogy2: Motivating Acoustic 
   E#ciency. Gahanna, Ohio: Insideview Press.
   Delvaux, Bertrand, and David Howard. 2014. “ A New Method to Explore 
   the Spectral Impact of the Piriform Fossae on the Singing Voice: 
   Benchmarking Using MRI-Based 3D-Printed Vocal Tracts. ” PLoS ONE, 9 
   (7): e102680. https://doi .org /10 .1371 /journal .pone .0102680.
   Herbst, Christian T., and Jan G. ,vec. 2014. “ Adjustment of Glottal 
   Con/f_igurations in Singing. ” Journal of Singing, 70 (3): 301–8.
   Herbst, Christian T., David Howard, and Jan G. ,vec. 2015. “!e Sound 
   Source in Singing—Basic Principles and Muscular Adjustments for Fine-
   Tuning Vocal Timbre. ” In D. Howard, J. Nix, and G. Welch (eds.), !e 
   Oxford Handbook of Singing. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
   Howell, Ian. 2016. “Parsing the Spectral Envelope: Toward a General !eory 
   of Vocal Tone Color. ” DMA thesis, New England Conservatory of Music. 
   Retrieved from https://www .academia .edu /29162454.
   PRAA.indb   185PRAA.indb   185 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
   Selected References  186
   Selected References
   Howell, Ian. 2017. “Necessary Roughness in the Voice Pedagogy 
   Classroom: !e Special Psychoacoustics of the Singing Voice. ” 
   VOICEPrints, !e Journal of the New York Singing Teachers’ Association, 
   14 (5): 4–7.
   Howell, Ian. 2025. Hearing Singing: A Guide to Functional Listening and Voice 
   Perception. Lanham: Rowman & Little/f_ield.
   Ladefoged, Peter. 1962. Elements of Acoustic Ponetics. Chicago, Il: University 
   of Chicago Press.
   Lovetri, Jeanette. 2012. “!e Confusion about Belting: A Personal 
   Observation. ” VoicePrints: Journal of the New York Singing Teachers’ 
   Association (September–October): 4–7.
   McCoy, Scott. 2012. Your Voice, An Inside View. Princeton, NJ: Inside View 
   Press.
   McKinney, James. 1982. !e Diagnosis and Correction of Vocal Faults. San 
   Diego, CA: Singular Press.
   Miller, Donald G. 2000. Registers of the Singing Voice. Groningen: Groningen 
   Press.
   Miller, Donald G. 2008. Resonance in Singing. Princeton, NJ: Inside View 
   Press.
   Miller, Richard. 1986. !e Structure of Singing: System and Art in Vocal 
   Technique. New Y ork: Schirmer Books.
   Nair, Garyth. 1999. Voice—Tradition and Technology. San Diego, CA: 
   Singular Publishing Group.
   Nair, Garyth. 2007. !e Cra/f_t of Singing. San Diego, CA: Plural Publishing.
   Obert, Kerrie, and Chadley Ballantyne, interview by Kari Ragan. 2019. 
   “Getting the Twang of It. ” NATS Chat, January 13. https:// .youtube .com /
   watch ?v =KHjbqUYrb04.
   Perna, Nicholas. 2015. “Nasality: Do Y ou Hear What I See?” VOICEPrints, 
   12 (1): 6–7.
   Perna, Nicholas. 2020. “Nasality Deconstructed. ” Journal of Singing, 76 (4): 
   429–32.
   Schutte, Harm K., and Donald, G. Miller. 1993. “Belting and Pop, 
   Nonclassical Approaches to Female Middle Voice: Some Preliminary 
   Considerations. ” Journal of Voice, 7 (2): 142–50.
   Schutte, Harm K., and Donald, G Miller. 2005. “Mixing Registers: Glottal 
   Source or Vocal Tract. ” Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 57: 278–91.
   Schutte, Harm K., and Donald, G. Miller. 1993. “Physical De/f_inition of the 
   Flageolet Register. ” Journal of Voice, 7 (3): 206–12.
   Schutte, Harm K., and Donald, G. Miller. 2005. “Resonance Strategies 
   Revealed in Recorded Tenor High Notes. ” Folia Phoniatrica et 
   Logopaedica, 57: 292–307.
   PRAA.indb   186PRAA.indb   186 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
   Selected References 187
   Schutte, Harm K., Donald, G. Miller, and Jan G. ,vec. 1995. “Measurement 
   of Formant Frequencies and Bandwidths in Singing. ” Journal of Voice, 9 
   (3): 290–6.
   Steinhauer, Kimberly M., and Jo Estill. 2008. “!e Estill Voice Model: 
   Physiology of Emotion. ” In Voice and Emotion, Vol. 2, 83–99. San Diego: 
   Plural Publishing.
   Story, Brad. 2016. “!e Vocal Tract in Singing. ” In G. Welch, D. M. Howard, 
   & J. Nix (eds.), !e Oxford Handbook of Singing. Oxford: Oxford 
   University Press. https://doi .org /10 .1093 /oxfordhb /9780199660773 .013 
   .012.
   Sundberg, Johan. 2001a. “ Articulatory Interpretation of the Singing 
   Formants. ” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 55: 838–44.
   Sundberg, Johan. 2001b. “Level and Center Frequency of the Singer’s 
   Formant. ” Journal of Voice, 15 (2): 176–86.
   Sundberg, Johan. 1987. !e Science of the Singing Voice. Imprint DeKalb, Ill.: 
   Northern Illinois University Press.
   Sundberg, Johan. 1974. “ Articulatory Interpretation of the Singing 
   Formants. ”Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 55: 838–44.
   Sundberg, Johan. Miriam Havel, M. B. Lã Filipa, Brian P . Gill, and Jessica Lee. 
   2016. “Nasal Resonance and Singing. ” Paper presented at the 45th Annual 
         Symposium: Care of the Professional Voice, Philadelphia, PA, June, 2.
         Titze, Ingo. 1994. Principles of Voice Production. Englewood Cliﬀs, N.J.: 
         Prentice Hall.
         Titze, Ingo, and Brad Story. 1997. “ Acoustic Interactions of the Voice Source 
         with the Lower Vocal Tract. ” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 
         101 (4): 2234–43.
         Titze, Ingo, and Katherine Verdolini Abbott. 2012. Vocology: !e Science and 
         Practice of Voice Habilitation, Salt Lake City, Utah: !e National Center 
         for Voice & Speech.
         Titze, Ingo, et al. 2015. “Toward a Consensus on Symbolic Notation of 
         Harmonics, Resonances, and Formants in Vocalization. ” !e Journal of 
         the Acoustical Society of America, 137 (5): 3005–7.
         Titze, Ingo, and T. Riede. in press 2025. “ A Proposal for Epithelial 
         Dominance in Extremely High Fundamental Frequency Vocalizations. ” 
         !e Journal of the Acoustical Society of America.
         PRAA.indb   187PRAA.indb   187 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
         Index
         absolute spectral tone color 6, 16–18, 
         30–6, 47, 62, 68, 70–2, 76, 97, 
         104, 109, 111, 126, 129, 135, 
         144, 153 
         acoustic(s) 1, 7, 93, 107, 167 
         belting, of 38, 44–5, 107–8, 
         110–13, 122–3, 154 
         coupling 45–8, 153, 170 
         feedback 35, 56, 67, 72, 83, 104, 
         131–2, 162, 166 
         pedagogy 93 
         register 26, 44, 49, 65, 93, 119, 
         153, 155, 165 
         registration 34, 41 n.3, 47, 75–7, 
         94, 153, 165, 179 
         sensation 61, 82–3, 104, 138 
         strategy 107, 111, 122–3 
         tube acoustics 93, 125 
         voice acoustics 7, 167 
         aﬀect 19, 43, 61, 68, 74, 99, 101, 103, 
         109, 112, 117, 126, 138–40, 
         143, 153 
         Appleman, Ralph 73 
         articulation 31, 101–2, 105, 132, 142, 
         154 
         aryepiglottic sphincter 38, 111, 154, 
         157 
         auditory roughness 15–16, 18, 70, 
         109, 111, 120, 122, 126, 154 
         balanced resonance 35, 37–8, 67, 73, 
         155 
         bandwidth(s) 27, 43–4, 54–5, 62, 148, 
         154, 162 
         broad 148, 154 
         clustered 62 
         narrow 154 
         Beach, Amy 85–7 
         belting 38, 44–5, 107–13, 122–3, 154, 
         158 
         Blake, Rockwell 116, 184 
         breathy phonation 14, 155, 162 
         chest 4, 15, 46, 49, 109–10, 112, 
         119–21, 138, 165, 171 
         chest voice 4, 60, 150, 154 
         chest mix 96, 122 
         chest register 46, 108, 165 
         chesty, chestier 15, 18, 53, 67, 
         155–6, 160 
         chiaroscuro 35, 38, 40, 46, 57 n.1, 
         67–9, 73–4, 155 
         close timbre 44, 47, 50–1, 53, 65,  
         71, 85–8, 95–6, 117–19,  
         153, 163, 169. See also voce 
         chiusa 
         close vowel 33, 48, 51, 56, 60, 67–9, 
         76, 118–19, 155, 163 
         semi-close 77 
         closed quotient 72, 150, 156–7 n.1 
         closing 12–13, 15, 34, 44, 49, 65, 
         74–6, 84, 89, 94, 115–18, 156 
         closing rate 13, 15 
         mini-closing 76, 94 
         vocal folds, of 12 
         Co#n, Berton 73 
         contact quotient 119–20, 150, 156 
         convergence, convergent 33, 48, 61, 
         66, 69–70, 72–4, 102 
         resonator 38, 52, 66–7, 73, 99, 
         118, 156, 166, 169 
         vowel 144–5 
         PRAA.indb   188PRAA.indb   188 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
         Index 189
         cover 47, 49, 62, 65, 74, 78, 84, 
         115–17, 155–6 
         acoustic de/f_inition 74, 115, 117 
         heavy cover 84, 116, 159 
         vocal folds, of 120, 161, 168 
         cricothyroid muscles (CT) 51, 67, 
         120–1, 139, 156, 160–1, 163, 
         171 
         depth 15, 32–3, 37–8, 44, 47, 54–5, 
         65–9, 116, 126, 143, 156, 159 
         divergence, divergent 45–6, 56, 108, 
         111, 132, 157, 163, 169 
         resonator 46, 108 
         downstream resistor 142, 144, 157 
         electroglottography (EGG) 149–50, 
         157 
         epilarynx, epilaryngeal 22, 36, 38, 73, 
         154, 157–8, 166, 168 
         Fach 30, 37, 43, 56, 65, 157 
         &ow phonation 15, 48, 137, 162 
         formant(s) 18, 22, 25–40 
         clustering 33, 38, 44, 53, 96, 158, 
         171 
         /f_irst formant 18, 26, 30, 32–5, 
         38, 48, 50–1, 55–6, 60–2, 
         77, 94–5, 156, 158, 163, 169, 
         179–80 
         lowering 33, 52, 116 
         raising 33–4, 44–6, 107–8, 
         117, 131 
         harmonic interactions with 34, 41 
         n.3, 93 
         locations 26, 29, 34, 46, 50, 95, 
         125–6, 169, 179–80 
         number of 30 
         roles of 30, 32, 34 
         second formant 30, 33–6, 46, 54, 
         61, 94, 100, 104, 159, 169 
         front vowel 35, 55, 73, 82, 104, 132, 
         159 
         front-back dimension 34–6, 69–70, 
         159 
         fronted tongue 36, 55, 95, 101, 159 
         fullness 32–3, 44, 55, 63, 69, 96, 159 
         fundamental frequency (fo) 6, 8, 11–18, 
         37, 44, 47, 59–60, 63, 93, 96, 
         153, 159, 163, 164, 170–1 
         Granqvist, Svante 145, 147 
         Handel, G. F . 87 
         harmonic(s) 6–8, 11–18, 24–6, 28–9, 
         43–5, 51, 54, 59, 70–2, 93–5, 
         111, 145, 153–4, 161, 164, 
         172, 174 
         harmonic series 6–7 
         head 47, 68, 82, 104–5, 135 
         dominant 95–6, 132 
         heady, headier 15, 18, 53, 96, 121, 
         159–60 
         mix 122 
         voice 4, 49, 51, 53, 55, 119, 170–1 
         heavy 117, 121 
         cover 116, 159 
         mechanism 119 
         production 121 
         Helmholtz resonator 21–2, 159 
         inertance, inertive reactance 73, 142, 
         160 
         inhalation 
         noiseless 61, 99–100 
         instructional technology 1–3, 145 
         intensity 5–6, 8, 12–13, 16, 20 n.1, 53, 
         97, 111, 154, 160, 166–7 
         interactivity 8, 24, 37–8, 72–3, 160, 
         162, 166 
         knowledge 
         declarative 3–4, 120, 156 
         procedural 3–4, 81, 104, 112, 115, 
         117, 120–1, 165 
         Kraus, Alfredo 116 
         PRAA.indb   189PRAA.indb   189 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
         Index 190
         Large, John 73 
         laryngeal registration 19, 50–2, 
         65, 67, 94, 122, 125, 139, 
         141–4. See also chest, head; 
         mechanisms zero, one, 
         two, & three; cricothyroid, 
         thyroarytenoid 
         linear source-/f_ilter model 7, 12, 22, 
         24, 109, 160 
         London, George 89, 183 
         loudness 20 n.4, 27, 137, 160 
         Lovetri, Jeanette 110 
         Madde synthesizer 2, 3, 12, 17, 30, 51, 
         62, 145–7, 172–8 
         mechanism, vibrational 15, 20 n.3, 
         61, 119–20, 141, 146, 150, 
         171 
         one (M1) 15, 59, 67, 108, 110, 119, 
         155–6, 160–1, 165 
         three (M3) 59, 120, 160–1 
         two (M2) 16, 51, 59, 67, 119, 
         155–6, 160–1, 165 
         zero, (M0) 161 
         Miller, Donald Gray 36, 55, 73, 148, 
         150–1 
         mode of phonation 13–15, 17–18, 
         161, 172 
         breathy phonation 14, 122, 146, 
         162 
         &ow phonation 15, 48, 137, 146, 
         162 
         pressed phonation 14, 19, 46,  
         56, 65–6, 103, 108, 110,  
         121, 137–8, 142, 146, 157, 
         162 
         music 6, 91, 107 
         contemporary commercial 
         (CCM) 18, 29, 37, 54, 94, 
         156, 158, 168, 171 
         musical theater 45, 95, 107, 121–2, 
         154, 168 
         popular music 107, 156 
         world music 45, 95, 107, 122, 154, 
         157 
         nasalance 144, 162 
         noise 5–8, 11, 14, 18, 20 n.1, 61, 
         100, 146, 159, 166. See also 
         inhalation, noiseless 
         non-linear source-/f_ilter model 24–5, 
         72, 162 
         non-linearity 24, 146 
         open throat 61, 99 
         open timbre 45–7, 50, 65, 82, 84, 
         86–7, 89, 90, 109, 111, 117, 
         119, 125–6, 128–9, 133, 153, 
         163, 169. See also voce aperta 
         open vowel 33, 46, 49, 51, 54, 67, 73, 
         75–8, 83, 108–9, 119, 126–8, 
         157, 163, 165 
         opening, vowel 53, 55–6, 62, 69, 71, 
         74, 78, 90, 94, 96, 106, 117, 
         136 
         openness-closeness dimension 32–3, 
         163 
         overtones 163 
         partials 14–15, 22, 27, 37–8, 43, 51, 
         53, 97, 104, 110–11, 120, 159, 
         163, 172, 174–5 
         passaggio 66, 77, 116–17, 163 
         lower passaggio 51, 62, 65–79 n.1, 
         81, 83, 163, 181 
         primo passaggio 68, 76–7, 79 n.1, 
         163 
         secondo passaggio 76–9 n.1, 163 
         upper passaggio 51, 65, 76–7 
         zona di passaggio 68, 69, 75–7, 83, 
         143, 163 
         passive vowel modi/f_ication 
         migration 34, 47, 50, 66, 69–71, 
         76, 81–4, 86, 115, 117, 126, 
         130, 145, 164, 170, 177–9 
         Pavarotti, Luciano 115, 184 
         PRAA.indb   190PRAA.indb   190 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
         Index 191
         pedagogy, pedagogic 1, 4, 9, 17, 27, 
         50, 70, 81, 83, 104, 115, 118, 
         121, 137, 141, 145, 147 
         perception, percept 4–6, 8, 16–18, 20, 
         25, 41 n.3, 78 
         of frequency (pitch) 5, 6, 8, 11 
         of intensity (loudness) 20, 27, 137, 
         160 
         of registration 120–1, 138, 141–2, 
         156 
         of tonal sensation 82, 103 
         of turning over 62, 68, 81, 85, 156 
         of vibrato 11, 137–8, 147, 149, 151 
         of voice type 56, 83 
         of vowel, timbre 32, 35–6, 47, 62, 
         68–71, 74, 81–2 
         perturbation 23, 30, 154, 158, 164 
         piriform sinuses 38, 157, 164, 168 
         pitch 5–8, 11, 15–17, 19–22, 26, 39, 
         43–5, 47–8, 50, 54–6, 62, 67, 
         96, 100, 117, 131–2, 137–9, 
         143, 147, 159, 164–5, 171–3 
         pitch of turning 50, 68, 84, 86, 118, 
         126–7, 130, 164 
         power spectrum 12, 39–40, 49, 
         149–51, 164, 167 
         pressed phonation. See mode of 
         phonation 
         pressure 
         breath 14, 22, 38, 111, 138, 161 
         waveform 6, 15, 149, 159, 165 
         Price, Leontyne 62, 183 
         primary acoustic register 
         transition 47, 49, 76, 95, 131, 165, 
         176 
         primary laryngeal register 165 
         primary turning 75–8 
         quarter-wave resonator 22–3, 27, 37, 
         93, 158, 164, 166 
         Rachmaninoﬀ, Sergei 84, 183 
         Ravel, Maurice 85, 89, 183 
         reactance 38, 43, 73, 142, 157, 160, 
         166 
         Real-time spectrography 147–9, 151, 
         166–7 
         resonance(s) 3, 7–9, 11, 16, 19, 21,  
         23, 25, 27, 29–32, 39, 43–4, 
         93, 99, 103, 153–4, 158, 166, 
         169 
         anti-resonance 157, 164, 168 
         balance 35, 37–8, 73, 148–9, 155 
         characteristics 7, 9, 25, 28–9, 39, 
         95, 167 
         /f_irst 22, 26, 30, 31, 33–4, 36, 41 
         n.3, 44–56, 60, 62–3, 71–2, 
         75, 94–6, 117, 122, 125, 131, 
         144, 153, 169 
         frequency 22, 23 
         harmonic interactions 26, 34, 
         43–4, 49, 55, 64, 71–2, 74–5, 
         78, 93, 95, 125–6, 145–6, 
         152–3, 170 
         higher 23 
         lower, lowest 21, 23, 32 
         peaks 21, 28 
         primary 27 
         second 30–1, 33–6, 39, 41 n.3, 
         52–5, 62, 78, 87, 153, 155, 163 
         strategies 34–6, 38, 45, 49, 57 n.1, 
         67, 72, 78, 116–17, 156–7, 
         163 
         tracking 158 
         tube 28, 154 
         tuning 19, 24, 31, 36, 44, 68, 134, 
         158, 164 
         roll-oﬀ 8, 12, 14–16, 19, 51, 145–6, 166, 
         172–4 
         Schubert, Franz 89–91, 184 
         Schutte, Harm 148 
         second formant. See formant, second 
         semantics 3, 7, 121 
         diﬀerences 115, 118, 122 
         semi-occluded vocal tract 142, 143, 166 
         PRAA.indb   191PRAA.indb   191 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
         Index 192
         singer’s formant cluster (SFC) 14, 
         36–8, 46, 55, 57 n.1, 65, 67, 
         69, 73, 109, 144, 151, 154–5, 
         157–8, 164, 167, 171 
         formant tracking 44, 77, 96, 158 
         formant tuning 33, 44, 69, 72, 95, 
         158 
         strategies 36, 54 
         vowel formants 29, 31, 50, 104, 
         153, 158, 169–70 
         somatosense 4, 31, 82, 156, 167–8 
         front-to-back 67 
         locational 36, 68, 103, 105, 113, 
         117, 120–1, 126, 129, 133, 
         135, 161 
         migration of 26, 117 
         timbral 65, 68, 135 
         vibrotactile 104 
         sound transfer characteristics 7, 25, 
         28–9, 157 
         spectral envelope 39, 167 
         spectral slope 8, 12–13, 15, 18–19, 
         24–5, 97, 141, 159–60, 164, 
         166–7 
         spectrography 147–2, 166–7 
         Strauss, Richard 62–4, 183 
         Sundberg, Johan 36, 38, 73, 144 
         thyroarytenoid muscles (TA) 15, 65, 
         111, 120, 160, 168, 171 
         tilt. See roll oﬀ 
         Titze, Ingo 29, 36, 38, 59, 73, 120 
         tools 2, 145–52 
         transglottal pressure diﬀerence 14, 
         19–20, 24, 95, 107–11, 121–2, 
         142, 157, 160–1, 166–7 
         transient theory, model 7, 24, 167 
         turning, turning over 47, 49–51, 54, 
         65, 70, 74, 78, 81–3, 117, 127, 
         140, 155–6, 159, 165, 168, 
   2017. See also pitch of turning; 
         primary turning 
         mini- 76–7, 87, 89–90, 94, 126 
         vertical phase diﬀerence 15, 59, 121, 
         160–1, 168 
         vocal fry 119, 161 
         vocal tract 8, 9, 11, 13–14, 18–25, 
         27–32, 34–5, 37–40, 43, 53, 
         59, 65, 70, 93, 95, 99, 100, 
         103, 108, 110–11, 148, 153–6, 
         158, 161, 164, 166–71, 173–6 
         /f_ilter 168–9, 171 
         tube 27–31, 37, 47, 52, 54–6, 65–6, 
         69–70, 74–6, 93–4, 96, 99, 
         101–2, 108, 125, 154, 159, 
         166, 168, 170, 179 
         voce aperta 4, 45, 57 n.1, 65, 115, 153, 
         163, 169 
         voce chiusa 4, 47, 57 n.1, 65, 115, 153, 
         155–6, 163, 169 
         VoceVista 2, 148–52, 178–9 
         voice 1, 2, 4, 7–9, 11–13, 15, 25, 26, 
         32, 65, 94–5, 157, 179 
         analysis 1, 2, 148, 151, 164, 166 
         lower 59, 60, 65 
         middle 34, 55, 60–1, 66, 110 
         non-treble 36, 44–5, 47–51, 54, 
         56, 65, 67, 69, 74–5, 78, 81, 
         83–4, 96, 125–6, 129, 163, 
         165 
         pharyngeal 38, 61, 164 
         science 1–2, 6, 27, 73, 119,  
         123 n.1 
         source 7–9, 11–13, 17–19, 21–2, 
         24, 28–9, 43, 141, 143–4, 
         154–5, 160–1, 167, 169, 172 
         synthesizer 2, 145–7, 173–4 
         treble 34, 37, 44, 48, 51–2, 54–5, 
         57 n.1, 59–60, 62, 64 n.2, 
         65, 78, 81, 83, 96, 108, 110, 
         125–7, 129, 132, 135, 158, 
         163, 165, 170 
         type 18, 30, 37, 119, 178 (see also 
         Fach) 
         upper 34, 36, 47, 61, 66, 76, 132, 
         163–4 (see also head, chest) 
         PRAA.indb   192PRAA.indb   192 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
         Index 193
         vowel(s) 102, 144 
         back 22, 35, 55, 81–2 
         close 33, 48, 51, 56, 60, 64, 67,  
         77, 83, 117–19, 155, 159,  
         169 
         de/f_inition, identity 16, 17, 23, 
         33–4, 60, 69–1, 74, 132, 169 
         formants/resonances 26, 30–1, 40, 
         55, 94, 158 
         front 22, 35–6, 55, 81–2, 159 
         modi/f_ication/migration 28, 32, 
         34, 50, 52, 60, 62–3, 70–2, 74, 
         82, 84, 115, 117, 131–2, 153, 
         164, 170 
         open 33, 45–6, 48–9, 51, 53–4, 56, 
         77, 83, 119, 163, 169 
         over-vowel 97, 108, 163, 168 
         placement sensations 36, 103–5, 
         161 
         tone color 6, 32, 35, 71–2, 74, 104, 
         137, 153 
         turning 50, 67–8, 74, 77, 81, 86, 
         94, 126, 130, 140, 164, 168 
         under-vowel 31, 68, 71, 97, 
         116–17, 126, 129, 168 
         whoop 37, 44, 47–9, 51–6, 57 n.2, 
         62–4, 69, 71, 76–8, 93–6, 
         125–8, 131–2, 135–6, 153, 
         158, 166, 170, 175–6 
         yell 44–6, 54, 65, 68, 74, 82, 93, 95, 
         107–9, 116–17, 122–3, 126, 
         154, 158, 169–70 
         coupling 65, 170 
         instinct 45, 68, 74, 117, 137, 
         139–40 
         timbre 45–6, 54, 95, 107 
         PRAA.indb   193PRAA.indb   193 7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM
         PRAA.indb   194PRAA.indb   194 7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM
         PRAA.indb   195PRAA.indb   195 7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM
         PRAA.indb   196PRAA.indb   196 7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM
         PRAA.indb   197PRAA.indb   197 7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM
         PRAA.indb   198PRAA.indb   198 7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM
