
16
Laryngeal Registration 
Revisited
!is text is deliberately focused on voice acoustics, with minimal 
reference to other crucial biomechanical aspects of voice pedagogy 
(anatomy, breathing, etc.), all of which are important in their own right 
and interact signi/f_icantly with the acoustics of production. However, 
laryngeal registration is so directly involved in and interactive with 
voice source acoustics, it will receive some brief attention here. From an 
acoustic point of view, what is needed from the voice source is a clean, 
relatively clear excitation of the vocal tract air column with a spectral slope 
appropriate to the range and dynamic level required for the situation. !e 
singer must also be capable of traversing the range without perceptibly 
abrupt changes in the source spectral slope, even when crossing from 
one vibrational mechanism to another, such as from “chest” to “head. ” 
Acoustic interaction and feedback are o/f_ten involved in smoothing these 
transitions, but we should /f_irst consider the necessary muscular valve 
adjustments themselves.
Muscle Action
A prominent theory postulates that the two primary, mutually antagonistic 
muscular functions of the larynx that shape and tauten the vocal folds—
the shortening, thickening TA ’s and the lengthening, thinning CT’s—
cooperate in an overlapping middle range to achieve a smooth “baton 
exchange” by very gradually shi/f_ting the proportions of their involvement, 
PRAA.indb   141PRAA.indb   141 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  142
Laryngeal Registration Revisited
all while the muscles that approximate the vocal folds typically maintain 
competent, comfortable closure. !ough perceptually smooth register 
transitions are heard in performances of excellent singers, a perfectly 
smooth transfer of muscle activity, in which one group tapers involvement 
gradually down to zero, has rarely been measured. !ere is almost always 
a point at which a binary toggle from greater to thinner vocal fold 
contact is measurable, even when accomplished essentially inaudibly. 
!ere is probably an aerodynamic or acoustic factor at play that triggers 
this observable change. Nevertheless, it is both an important goal and a 
fruitful strategy to practice absolute perceptual smoothness of laryngeal 
registration across range.
Downstream Resistors and  
Semi-Occluded Vocal Tracts
One eﬀective approach to smoothing range negotiation is to glissando 
across the entire range using some helpful downstream resistor or semi-
occluded vocal tract articulation. A downstream resistor is any articulator 
position or function that requires or resists air&ow and is downstream 
from the vocal folds, that is, nearer to or at the lips. If the resistor is a 
vibrator, like a tongue or lip trill, it will require steady air&ow and pressure 
to maintain oscillation. !e vocal folds must allow enough &ow through 
the glottis to be in balance with the downstream resistor, whose semi-
occlusion generates a back pressure that bene/f_icially reduces the upstream 
transglottal pressure diﬀerence. A semi-occluded articulation at or near 
the lips or at the dorsum/palatal narrowing can increase inertive reactance, 
lowering the phonation threshold pressure (the amount of pressure needed 
to bring the vocal folds into vibration). Either strategy reduces pressed 
phonation. Downstream resistors or semi-occluded articulations that can 
be used in glissandi for smoothing laryngeal register shi/f_ts include:
 1) Tongue trills
 2) Lip trills/raspberries/blubbering
 3) Phonating through a short straw
 4) A buzzy hum or buzzing through a lightly bite-held lower lip 
(modi/f_ied [v])
PRAA.indb   142PRAA.indb   142 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
 Laryngeal Registration Revisited 143
 5) “Kazooing” through a tiny [w] or fricative [β] (“puﬀy cheeks”)
 6) Open-mouthed [ŋ] or other nasal consonants such as [n m]
Motivating Laryngeal Stability
With any of these glissandi, care should be taken to facilitate a &exible, 
comfortable stability in which the larynx does not rise appreciably when 
approaching the primary register transition zone (ca. B3-G4). !is can 
be helped by motivating the phonation in that transitional range with 
expressive in&ection or with aﬀects that stabilize the throat shape and 
laryngeal depth, such as:
 1) Self-pitying whimper
 2) “Up to no good but pleased with yourself ” mischief
 3) Suppressed laughter
 4) Sobbiness
 5) Hilarity
!ese aﬀects can apparently be done rather strongly without the risk of 
injury or even of muscle rigidity. As with yawning, these aﬀective actions 
are physically self-limiting, with muscles working in supple antagonism to 
inherent tissue elasticity. !ough the student may be instinctively inclined 
to relax aﬀective positioning when opening for the upper range, resonance 
and vocal tract structural poise are better served by strengthening the 
aﬀect with ascent as occurs “in the wild. ” !e expressional migration of 
aﬀect motivates pitch change.
Laryngeal Registration Goals
!e goals of laryngeal registration are a clean, clear, light voice source 
“buzz” that migrates from buzzier to smoother throughout the entire 
compass, with no pressure surges, minimal pressure increase, and with a 
stable larynx and throat space. Maintaining throat poise when ascending 
through the zona di passaggio  may need to be more deliberate . Since 
semi-occluded exercises are not executed on open-mouthed vowels, they 
PRAA.indb   143PRAA.indb   143 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  144
moderate some of the acoustic eﬀects that might otherwise destabilize 
register transitions. !is allows the focus of attention to be exclusively on 
the smoothness and ease of a voice source that is acoustically organized 
across the range.
Glissandoing on a vowel poses more challenges but would be the next 
step a/f_ter downstream resistors. It is usually easier to glissando on naturally 
convergent vowels, such as [i], provided the mouth is opened gradually 
and su#ciently to formant track 1 fo a/f_ter arrival in whoop timbre for 
pitches above fR1. All vowels will necessarily migrate in timbre across range 
with an increase in the vowel’s complementary tone color relative to its 
identifying target tone color. !e complementary tone color for most 
vowels is the lower, /f_irst formant contribution, which adds a warming, 
rounding, and possibly neutralizing element. Language targets, originating 
at speech range, cannot be aggressively maintained without risking higher 
pressure and glottal resistance levels. Nonetheless, intelligible diction is 
possible for most voices surprisingly high. Pitches sung above the treble 
clef will have reduced vowel de/f_inition options.
The Use of Nasalance
!e use of a subtle amount of nasalance can assist with training laryngeal 
register transitions across range, at least in SOVT vocal explorations. 
Nasalance broadens and weakens the intensity of the /f_irst resonance and 
the percentage of its resultant warming, rounding, /f_irst formant tone 
color contribution (Sundberg et al. 2016). !is has two eﬀects: a weaker 
/f_irst resonance reduces its potential to acoustically destabilize phonation 
at laryngeal register shi/f_ts; its weakening also creates the impression 
of strengthening the timbral singer’s formant cluster contribution, 
brightening the overall timbral mix percept. !ough smooth laryngeal 
registration can be successfully negotiated and trained without the use 
of nasalance, judicious use of it in early training can be a very bene/f_icial 
exploratory strategy. Its persistence in the /f_inished product of unampli/f_ied 
singing is controverted as potentially compromising overall power (Perna 
2020) and risking an undesirable percept of actual nasality.
PRAA.indb   144PRAA.indb   144 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics