4
Overview of the Changing 
Theories of Vocal Resonance
Our understanding of how the vocal tract transfers acoustic energy from 
the voice source to the outside world has evolved considerably over the 
last /f_i/f_ty years. Before an explanation of the details of the current theory 
is given, a cursory overview of how theories of vocal resonance have 
developed will provide some context.
Resonance
Resonance is the tendency of an object or system (like the air contained 
by the vocal tract) to respond (oscillate) longer and more strongly to 
particular frequencies introduced into it. !e oscillation of frequencies 
generated by the voice source that are at or near the resonance peaks of the 
vocal tract will be greater than those frequencies that are “in the valleys” 
between and farther away from those resonance peaks.
Coupled Helmholtz Resonators
One early model of vocal resonance was based on the conception of a 
series of successively coupled Helmholtz resonators: the /f_irst two being 
the pharynx and the oral cavity, with a narrowing created by a tongue 
bulge dividing them. !e basic principle in determining the “pitch” 
PRAA.indb   21PRAA.indb   21 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  22
Overview of the Changing Theories of Vocal Resonance
(resonance frequency) of each resonator was thought to be the size of the 
contained air space and the relative size of the exit of that space. !e larger 
the space and the smaller the exit of a Helmholtz resonator, the lower its 
resonance frequency. !erefore, an [i] with its large pharyngeal space and 
narrow, rather frontal exit into the oral cavity was thought to create a low 
“pitched” /f_irst resonance. !at resonance would then be coupled with the 
small space in front of the tongue hump with a larger exit (relative to the 
small oral space) at the lips, creating a higher “pitched” second resonance. 
!e explanatory eﬀectiveness of this theory was best for front vowels 
like [i], but less convincing for back vowels like [u], which has a low /f_irst 
resonance even though it has a relatively smaller pharyngeal space. !e 
coupled resonator theory le/f_t the tuning mechanism of higher resonances 
somewhat in question. It also did not account for the epilaryngeal tube, 
nor consider the functioning of the entire vocal tract as a single tube with 
multiple resonance peaks. !e accurate observation that larger spaces 
with smaller exits create lower resonances contributes to the innate but 
misleading sense that the pharynx is more associated with the lower, 
darker /f_irst resonance and the oral cavity with the higher, brighter second.
Linear Source-Filter Model
A more recent model—the linear source-/f_ilter model—presents 
vocal acoustics as being comprised of three elements: a power source 
(breath pressure and &ow), a source vibration (formed by the vocal fold 
oscillation), and a resonator (the vocal tract), which /f_ilters the input from 
the source, selectively strengthening or weakening partials from the voice 
source. !is model recognized that the tuning of vocal tract resonances 
could be more eﬀectively explained from a single, quarter-wave resonator 
model. A quarter-wave resonator is a tube closed at one end (the glottis) 
and open at the other (the lips). Sound waves or wave segments that 
have a pressure node at the lips and an antinode at the glottis will be 
re&ected (“echoed”) productively within the tube, building up standing 
waves, that is, resonance frequencies that are then featured in the radiated 
sound as formants. !is oppositional node:antinode circumstance /f_irst 
happens at one-fourth of a wavelength. !erefore, a closed-open tube is 
a resonator that naturally resonates a sound wave four times its length, 
PRAA.indb   22PRAA.indb   22 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
 Overview of the Changing Theories of Vocal Resonance 23
hence its designation, a ¼ or “quarter-wave” resonator. Uniformly shaped 
quarter-wave resonators reinforce sound   waves that are odd-numbered 
multiples of this lowest resonance frequency, all of which have nodes 
and antinodes at opposite ends of the vocal tract. !e waveforms of each 
higher resonance have additional pressure nodes (contextual “zeros”) and 
antinodes (maxima and minima) at various places along the vocal tract 
(Figure 4.1).
Perturbation Theory
!ose resonances can then be retuned by local perturbations (narrowings 
or widenings). A perturbation near a pressure node or antinode of a wave 
eﬀectively changes the length, and hence the resonance frequency of 
that wave. !e /f_irst two, lower vocal tract resonances have fewer nodes 
and antinodes, are therefore more susceptible to fewer, more simple 
perturbations (are more easily tunable). !ey also cover the frequency 
range of all vowel-like spectral tone colors, making the /f_irst two resonances 
both the most available and the most relevant for vowel de/f_inition and 
diﬀerentiation.
Figure 4.1 Schematic of the pressure nodes and antinodes of the ﬁrst 
three resonances of the vocal tract.
PRAA.indb   23PRAA.indb   23 7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  24
!e source-/f_ilter model was initially assumed to be strictly linear: a 
power source (breath) bringing the vocal folds into vibration, generating 
a set of harmonic frequencies which then proceed up and out. Some of 
these source harmonics are then selectively strengthened by the resonances 
of the vocal tract before /f_inally being radiated from the lips. !ough the 
vocal tract is not a uniform tube, this model is conceptually useful and 
explanatory, but erroneously implies an independence and chronologically 
temporal sequence of source and /f_ilter, a somewhat inaccurate origin and 
implied completeness of a harmonic frequency set, and falls short of 
explaining the inherent non-linear interactivity of resonator and vibrator.
Non-Linear Source-Filter Model
An even more recent version proposed a non-linear source-/f_ilter model 
with some degree of inherent interactivity from the onset, and potential 
for great interactive non-linearity with certain resonance tunings. As 
reported above, the voice source signal is interactively generated from the 
start. In certain circumstances (more on this later: See Non-linear Source-
Filter !eory Revisited, p. 73) acoustic energy reverberating in the /f_ilter 
can raise the eﬀective pressure above the glottis, productively reducing the 
transglottal pressure diﬀerence, and assisting the e#ciency and power of 
both vibrator and respiratory coordination.
The Transient Theory of Voice
All of the above cited theories highlight the frequency domain. Sound 
is actually generated in the time domain, in which events, such as 
pressure variations, occur or unfold in succession over time. Frequency 
measures how o/f_ten an event occurs within a given time span, as in the 
“times-per-second” designation of Hertz. An early model of voice, the 
transient theory, models voice as an additive pressure accumulation 
generated by the succession of individual glottal impulses. !is theory 
accurately recognizes that the vocal folds do not generate a complete set 
of harmonics with a spectral slope prior to resonation and /f_iltering by the 
PRAA.indb   24PRAA.indb   24 7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM
 Overview of the Changing Theories of Vocal Resonance 25
vocal tract. Instead, the abrupt closure of each single glottal pulse excites 
the air column of the vocal tract, causing an impulse containing a broad 
sweep of frequencies that immediately re&ects vocal tract resonances, 
that is, the sound transfer function of the vocal tract shape. In this way, 
resonances and radiated formants occur in a simultaneous combination 
of source and /f_ilter at each glottal impulse, prior to the reinforcement of 
harmonic frequency energy and content. Only at the periodic reiteration 
of those resonance-shaped impulses is a subset of the frequencies that 
are in sync with the periodicity of the successive pulse sequence, that is, 
some of its harmonic frequencies, reinforced, while other frequencies 
that are out of phase with the repeated successive glottal closing events 
are suppressed. !e time period during which this occurs is so brief, so 
immediate, as to be eﬀectively simultaneous to human perception. Only 
those frequencies that are both favored by the vocal tract transfer function 
(are near its resonance peaks) in each individual pulse and are also in 
sync (are harmonic) with the periodicity of the subsequent succession of 
glottic pulses are reinforced to survive and be represented in the complex, 
radiated waveform.
Summary
To summarize, though the non-linear source-/f_ilter theory is a helpful, 
simpli/f_ied model, voice is not actually created as a complete set of harmonic 
frequencies arising from the vocal folds with a particular spectral slope, 
that is subsequently /f_iltered by the resonances of the vocal tract. Source 
and /f_ilter are completely complicit and interactive from the start. Voice 
is more a sequence of &ow-interruption-resonance-shaped impulses that 
are then rapidly /f_iltered further in time by the periodicity of successive 
glottal closures. Again, only those frequencies that survived the initial 
/f_ilter characteristics and also are in sync with the period of the ongoing 
glottal impulses are represented in the radiated waveform. !at radiated 
waveform then re&ects the “hills and valleys” of the resonance structure of 
the vocal tract by featuring that subset of harmonics of the fundamental 
frequency that populate those “hills” with an overall spectral sloping of its 
frequency peaks.
PRAA.indb   25PRAA.indb   25 7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  26
Model Advice
!e complexity of these models may initially seem daunting and 
overwhelm the comprehension needed for practical application. However, 
since all acoustic transitions of range are predictable by the intervallic 
relationship between the several lower harmonics of the sung pitch and 
the /f_irst resonance of the vowel being sung, those transitions can be clearly 
and simply charted. Both the /f_irst resonance:/f_irst formant locations of 
vowels and the lowest three intervals of the harmonic series of a pitch are 
easily learnable and mappable, informing the attention and awareness of 
both teacher and singer (Figure 4.2).
Figure 4.2 Levels of acoustic events: There will be an acoustic register 
transition (timbral and somatosensory migration) at every notation on 
this chart relative to the vowel formant at the top of each column. The 
pitches are notated at harmonic intervals below the ﬁrst formants (one 
octave, an octave and a ﬁfth, two octaves). For more detail, see Chapter 
6: Resonance:Harmonic Interactions.
PRAA.indb   26PRAA.indb   26 7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM7/10/2025   4:38:49 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics