
12
The Acoustics of Belting
Increasingly over the last thirty years or so, voice teachers, including those 
trained primarily or exclusively in unampli/f_ied Western classical singing, 
have been called upon to address a wider variety of singing styles. While 
this text focuses more on the acoustics of unampli/f_ied classical singing 
practice, another dominant, alternative muscular and acoustic strategy 
appears to be the basis of—or at least to play a signi/f_icant role in—many 
other styles of singing. !at vocal style possibly evolved from “calling” 
over distances, but is now referred to in musical theater circles as belting, 
and will be brie&y addressed below. Research and conclusions about 
belting are still evolving. As of this publication, the dominant paradigm 
observes that belting, acoustically speaking, is a skillful, sustainable form 
of what we have here de/f_ined acoustically as the yell: a strong fR1 tracking 
of 2fo above the normal frequency of F1 for the vowel(s) in question. It 
is no surprise that this mode of phonation is a very common strategy in 
popular music, world music, as well as in musical theater. Its unskillful, 
raw form—yelling—is universal among humans. It is powerful, usually 
clear, high in energy, expressive, and emotionally strong. Because of its 
higher energy and potentially high transglottal pressure diﬀerence levels, 
it also poses higher health risks if unskillfully executed. Y et it is also 
apparent that those singers who master the skills necessary for this form 
of vocalism manage to sustain long and healthy careers. Let’s /f_irst review 
the acoustic characteristics of the raw yell:
Yell Characteristics Reviewed
Y ell timbre and function are accomplished by raising the /f_irst formant 
through:
PRAA.indb   107PRAA.indb   107 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  108
The Acoustics of Belting
 1) tube shortening (larynx raising),
 2) pharyngeal narrowing, and
 3) mouth widening;
 4) that is, by creating a more divergent resonator shape.
!e /f_irst two of these maneuvers are normally accomplished by 
activating swallowing muscles, which raise and partially constrict the 
laryngopharynx, narrowing the throat and preventing the use of the 
singer’s formant chiaroscuro timbre. Furthermore, a higher laryngeal 
position facilitates glottal closure strength, potentially in&uencing the 
vibrator function toward pressed phonation, especially if the brighter 
“over-vowel” component is conceptually fronted.
Y elling is typically done on open vowels like [a] or [ ɛ], because their 
high F1 locations and inherently divergent shapes make them more 
compatible with the acoustic requirements of the yell. !e yell is necessarily 
chest register (TA) or mechanism one dominant.
Belting: The Skillful Yell or Call
(see Semantic Diﬀerences/Belting and Y elling, p. 122.)
Which characteristics of yelling are necessary for belting and which 
modi/f_ications of raw yelling are needed for skillful belting? !e issue is in 
large part how to accomplish the acoustic eﬀect of yelling at breath pressure 
(transglottal pressure diﬀerence), breath &ow, and glottal resistance levels 
that are sustainable and healthy.
At present, there seems to be general agreement on the following 
principles:
 1) Belting is bright and perceptually speech- or call-like in quality.
 2) Belting calls for some divergence in vocal tract shaping.
 3) !erefore, the three characteristics of yelling listed above seem 
necessary to some degree (elevated larynx, narrowed pharynx, 
widened mouth).
 4) Vibrational mechanism one is extended higher—than in classical 
treble voice singing at least—but may be achieved with a 
somewhat thinner vocal fold shape (still thicker than mechanism 
PRAA.indb   108PRAA.indb   108 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
 The Acoustics of Belting 109
two, but somewhat less thick—referred to by some as “mix” when 
su#ciently high), that retains the auditory roughness (buzziness) 
of “chest” timbre but with less he/f_t, sheer breath force, and air&ow.
 5) Belt only really commences above the normal fR1:2fo intersections, 
especially of the mid to open vowels, where the possibility of yelling 
would also start. In other words, belt is initially an extension of 
open timbre, but not all open timbre is in belt mode.
Mouth widening is usually necessary in order to achieve and maintain fR1 
tracking of 2fo. However, in order to reduce transglottal pressure diﬀerence 
and resultant glottal resistance to sustainable levels:
 1) !e degree of larynx raising and pharynx narrowing is probably 
moderated somewhat (some belt specialists even maintain that 
while the larynx is not lowered for belt, raising the larynx is not 
necessary);
 2) Contraction/adduction of the false vocal folds may be inhibited by 
means of strategies such as the “suppressed laugh” aﬀect (Estill);
 3) Breath &ow is signi/f_icantly reduced to avoid the “air blast” of a raw yell;
 4) Some downstream “bene/f_icial narrowing” in the pharynx and/or 
at the tongue dorsum:palatal narrowing is employed to achieve 
“twang, ” (a brassy quality created by stronger high harmonics 
and strong higher formant components analogous to the singer’s 
formant cluster of classical sound, but more spread out, higher, 
and without the complementary depth). !is strategy improves 
e#ciency: more acoustic output for less pressure input.
Among specialists in belt, strategies are employed that:
 1) achieve clean, /f_irm, sustainable glottal closure throughout the 
range to ensure high-frequency spectral content.
 2) maximize ring/twang within the limits of the character being 
portrayed.
 3) extend a bright, speech-like vowel shaping and quality across 
the entire range, sacri/f_icing the depth and roundness of Western 
classical timbre to this brighter aesthetic. It might be termed 
chiarochiaro (bright/bright) timbre, in contrast and comparison to 
the chiaroscuro (bright/dark) timbre of classical singing.
 4) the choice of brighter vowels  (higher frequency F2s and target 
spectral tone colors).
PRAA.indb   109PRAA.indb   109 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  110
 5) though the resultant sound can move in the direction of pressed 
phonation and may sound pressed to ears accustomed to Western 
classical timbre, the actual function can be accomplished by 
acoustic strategies that emphasize upper partials and formants, 
coupled with a level of glottal closure that is clean and strong but 
is nonetheless comfortable, sustainable, and healthy, in which the 
transglottal pressure diﬀerence, which determines the necessary 
glottal resistance level, is kept su#ciently low.
Muscular Factors in Belting
!ere are muscular or biomechanical factors involving the vocal folds, the 
vocal tract, and breath management that accompany skillful, sustainable 
belting.
Vocal Fold Factors
As mentioned above, the thicker vocal fold shape of vibrational mechanism 
one (chest) is maintained into the upper voice of non-treble belters and 
extended through the middle voice of treble voice belters. Opinions vary 
as to just how far treble voices can extend this mechanism, but range at 
least to C5, if not higher. Individuals will certainly vary in achievable 
ability. However, one respected source reports that Broadway casters 
typically post the following expectations: “Must belt to D, must mix to F , 
must sing legit to A. ” (Lovetri 2012).
Mix
!e question of “mix” is controverted. !ere is no actual separate physical 
register for mix, if by register we mean a discrete laryngeal, muscularly 
caused function with its own distinct timbre. Many teachers—and 
Broadway casting agents—nonetheless use the term. What is probably 
meant by most for the term “mix” is:
PRAA.indb   110PRAA.indb   110 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
 The Acoustics of Belting 111
 1) an area of cooperation between the vocal fold shortening, 
thickening thyroarytenoids and the vocal fold-stretching, thinning 
cricothyroids; that nonetheless
 2) stays essentially in mechanism one (and retains its characteristic 
“buzziness”); but
 3) with a moderated thickness; and
 4) an acoustic strategy that enables sustainably lower transglottal 
pressure diﬀerence levels.
A more recent investigator (Howell) observes that, although the fR1:2fo 
tracking strategy that extends open timbre higher does maintain the 
intensity of that tracked second harmonic, the auditory roughness 
(“buzziness”) and brassy quality that characterize belt do not come 
from that strong 2 fo. !e second harmonics of belt range sounds 
remain within the spectral tone color range of [~ ɔ] and [~ ɑ] and can 
only add a warming, rounding eﬀect. Higher-numbered harmonics 
are needed, both for brighter timbre and for buzzier roughness. !ose 
belt characteristics are supplied by stronger, closely clustered, higher 
harmonics ((6 fo) being resonated by higher vocal tract resonances. 
Apparently, 2fo tracking and intensity facilitate stronger, higher partials 
and formants as well.
Vocal Tract Factors
In addition to the generally more divergent vocal tract shape, most belt 
specialists would agree on the need for a relatively poised, stabilized vocal 
tract, toned and tuned for maximal ring. !is would involve:
 1) a /f_irmed, li/f_ted, fronted so/f_t palate sensation, done in such a way as 
not to darken the timbre, rather in a way that facilitates ring;
 2) a narrowed aryepiglottic exit and/or pharyngeal narrowing to 
maximize twang/upper harmonics;
 3) avoidance of false vocal fold compression, which might introduce 
a noise element and require higher, less sustainable breath pressure 
levels;
 4) more lateral lip opening than is typical for Western classical 
timbre.
PRAA.indb   111PRAA.indb   111 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  112
All of these shaping, positioning factors should be accomplished as 
comfortably as possible. !e muscles involved in shaping will not be 
lax; rather, expressively, comfortably /f_irm, though not felt to be tight or 
constricted. Safe motivations for such positioning include various strong 
aﬀects (such as con/f_ident assertion) that stimulate the desired response. 
When the optimal tuning of the resonator is achieved, the sounds produced 
will have maximal comfort at the vocal folds and neck and e#cient air&ow 
levels, as if the sound originates from the top of the pharynx or higher, 
not from the lower throat or larynx. Strategies (sensorial, procedural 
intentions) that can assist the e#cient, brighter timbres required of the 
belt aesthetic include: a relatively high tongue dorsum; pleasurable aﬀects 
that cause a stretchy smile sensation across the mid-hard palate just in 
front of the molars; tipping the head up a bit to “expose” your hard palate; 
avoidance of dorsum lowering and tongue &attening; the eye-squint/nose-
scrunch look that accompanies con/f_ident assertion; sensing the sound 
higher, in and above the hard palate rather than low in the fore-mouth; 
and a short mouth-to-back wall distance perception.
Breath Management Factors
While sharing the characteristics of good function common to other 
styles, breath management for belting does call for especially high 
energization, lower air&ow, and somewhat higher air pressure levels. 
Although active contraction of the thorax (bearing down in a Valsalva 
maneuver) to achieve these diﬀerences is not recommended, there may 
well be an awareness of the higher abdominal muscle contraction levels 
that accompany the stronger, dramatic aﬀects expressed in belting. Excess 
thoracic compression can be avoided by stabilizing ribcage expansion to 
some degree. For example, the muscles that pull the shoulders laterally 
down and out are attached to and expand the ribs, inhibiting their 
downward and inward compression, as can the external intercostal 
muscles. Motivating this upper chest expansion with an aﬀective stimulus 
(such as excitement) can reduce the risk of counterproductive rigidity or 
active chest compression. A sense of whole-body involvement and full 
but unforced commitment to expression will help distribute the extra 
PRAA.indb   112PRAA.indb   112 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
 The Acoustics of Belting 113
work that the high energy levels of belting require. A tonal locational 
somatosense that is higher, above the palate or in the area of the 
nasopharynx rather than in the throat, recruits less forceful breath use. 
!e singer should not perceive the higher pressure levels to be localized 
just below the vocal folds or in the neck; rather, they should have a sense 
of a higher energy involvement of the entire body that is best organized 
by sincere expression.
PRAA.indb   113PRAA.indb   113 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
PRAA.indb   114PRAA.indb   114 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics