
10
Pedagogic Implications of 
Tube Acoustics
Since the vocal tract is essentially a quarter-wave tube resonator with 
natural resonances that vary by tube shape (i.e., that vary by vowel), then 
the following principles and strategies can form a reliable basis for a 
coherent, practical acoustic pedagogy.
General Principles
 z In seeking harmonic:resonance matches, singers are not really 
free to tune their harmonics. Harmonics automatically occur at 
mathematical relationships above the fundamental frequency (pitch) 
upon which they are built and which they are given by the composer 
to sing. Singers do have the ability to shape the vocal tract to retune 
the resonances, especially fR1 and fR2, that determine which harmonics 
are activated and selectively featured.
 z !ere are four possible resonance:harmonic interactions:
 − A resonance can allow a moving harmonic to pass through it (a 
change of acoustic register).
 − A resonance can be tuned to move across a stable harmonic (a 
change of vowel and acoustic register on the same pitch).
 − A resonance can be tuned to match and steadily retuned to track 
a moving harmonic (yell, whoop).
PRAA.indb   93PRAA.indb   93 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  94
Pedagogic Implications of Tube Acoustics
 − A resonance can avoid a harmonic coupling: (fR1 kept above 1fo to 
avoid whoop timbre; or fR2 tuned away from a higher harmonic 
to avoid shrillness).
 z All acoustic registration events occur relative to the /f_irst resonance/
/f_irst formant location of each vowel. (!e second formant may also 
be secondarily involved.)
 z Laryngeal registration adjustments are sometimes independent 
of acoustic registration events but are also o/f_ten in&uenced by 
interaction with acoustic registration phenomena.
 z !ere is an audible event whenever any harmonic crosses the /f_irst 
resonance: a timbral closing when a harmonic rises through fR1, and 
a timbral opening when a harmonic drops below fR1.
 z If tube length and shape are kept the same, the vowel and timbre 
will increasingly close with ascending pitch up to whoop timbre and 
increasingly open with descending pitch.
 z A voice does not turn over at the same pitch for all vowels.
 z Each vowel will turn over just above an octave below its /f_irst formant, 
where the 2 fo of the pitch being sung rises su#ciently above the 
vowel’s /f_irst resonance.
 z Other mini-closings or openings—involving higher harmonics 
intersecting fR1—also occur at locations that are predictable by 
vowel, pitch, and vocal Fach.
 z Predictable, stable turning/crossing locations indicate a stable tube 
length and shape.
 z !ere are only two ways to raise the /f_irst formant:
 − tube shortening
 − vowel opening (mouth and jaw opening and dorsum lowering)
 z !ere are only two ways to lower the /f_irst formant:
 − tube lengthening
 − vowel closing (mouth and jaw closing and dorsum raising)
 z Changes in tube length are rarely an appropriate strategy in Western 
classical technique, except for the extreme high treble register. 
However, they are typical in most CCM genres.
 z Exercises that explore the shi/f_ts of harmonic:resonance crossings 
assist students in sorting out:
 − what can stay the same across range and vowel
 − what must change across range and vowel
PRAA.indb   94PRAA.indb   94 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
 Pedagogic Implications of Tube Acoustics 95
 z Awareness of /f_irst formant locations and of the characteristics of 
resonance:harmonic interactions can form the basis for creative, 
eﬀective strategies:
 − for basic range development
 − for range or registration challenges that arise within the repertoire
Acoustic Strategies across Range
 z As long as the pitch being sung is low enough, that is, an octave 
or more below the /f_irst formant of the vowel being sung, there 
are enough harmonics available for resonation by the vocal tract 
formants to preclude the need for signi/f_icant formant tuning beyond 
assuming a generally resonant posture (an unconstricted throat, 
li/f_ted palate, fronted tongue, that is, adjusted for convergent, singer’s 
formant/chiaroscuro timbre).
 z For Western classical timbre, all harmonics other than 1 fo should 
be allowed to pass through fR1, that is, without formant tracking. 
!is takes training, since it is instinctive for the /f_irst resonance to 
track rising harmonics, especially 2 fo (yell timbre) and 1 fo (whoop 
timbre). For musical theater belt and many world music styles, fR1 
should track 2fo—as in the yell or call—up to ca. Bb4, but at healthy 
transglottal pressure diﬀerence and air&ow levels.
 z Below the primary open to close timbre transition (the fR1:2fo 
crossing), stay relatively close in pronunciation, keeping the /f_irst 
formant comfortably low for the vowel being sung.
 z Allow 2 fo to rise above fR1 at the /f_irst formant’s normal resonant 
speech location, causing the primary acoustic transition of “turning 
over” at that point.
 z Above the fR1:2fo crossing into close timbre, if the vocal tract length 
and/or vowel closeness are increased, fR1 will be lowered further and 
the voice will move into whoop timbre earlier (lower), that is, in well 
less than an octave. !is is a strategy typical of some treble voices, 
who prefer the more “head-dominant” timbre of Western classical 
singing.
PRAA.indb   95PRAA.indb   95 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  96
 z Above the fR1:2fo crossing into close timbre, if the vocal tract length 
and closeness are maintained, the timbre will become increasingly 
close until full whoop timbre is reached at the fR1:1fo juncture. !is is 
also a strategy typical of treble voices, which prefer the more “head-
dominant” timbre of Western classical singing.
 z Above the fR1:2fo crossing into close timbre, if the vowel is gradually 
opened within c l o s e  t i m b r e ,  t h a t  i s ,  n o t  s o  m u c h  a s  t o  a l l o w  fR1 
to overtake 2 fo, whoop timbre can be postponed or even avoided 
altogether, and more of an extended close/“chest mix” timbre will 
be maintained. !is is the typical strategy of non-treble voices, who 
prefer a more virile upper voice, unless seeking a heady, so/f_ter eﬀect. 
!is is especially needed on those close vowels whose F1 locations 
are within non-treble range. !is is also a strategy used in high belt 
mix.
 z At the fR1:1fo coupling, full whoop timbre (very heady/falsetto) is 
achieved, which is very typical and desirable for treble voices in 
Western classical singing.
 z When in whoop (fR1:1fo dominant) timbre, if fR2 is close to a higher 
harmonic, the timbre will be brighter and possibly shrill, depending 
on how much the higher harmonic is reinforced. In that situation, 
detuning fR2 (moving it farther away from the harmonic) by active 
vowel modi/f_ication will increase the timbral warmth and roundness.
 z Above the fR1:1fo (whoop timbre) juncture, the /f_irst resonance/formant 
must be raised in tandem with the rising fundamental (1fo) in order 
to maintain timbral fullness or avoid thinning. !is is accomplished 
primarily by vowel opening, but eventually by tube shortening in the 
extreme upper range of treble voices (ca. B5 and above).
 z An alternative strategy for treble voices above the fR1:1fo (whoop 
timbre) juncture might be to allow 1fo (the sung pitch) to rise above 
fR1 by retaining a closer vowel articulation if a high so/f_t tone with less 
warmth but more sparkle (a silvery, but thinner “&oat” quality) is 
sought. At loud dynamic levels, this strategy would result in a shrill 
tone.
 z When fR1 can be raised no further, ending fR1 tracking of the sung 
pitch’s 1fo, higher pitches will be in whistle register, being resonated 
possibly by a clustering of fR1 and fR2 or just by fR2.
PRAA.indb   96PRAA.indb   96 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
 Pedagogic Implications of Tube Acoustics 97
Dynamics
 z Crescendos increase the intensity of higher partials more than lower 
partials, creating a shallower spectral slope and brighter timbre with 
a higher percentage of over-vowel tone color.
 z Decrescendos decrease the intensity of higher partials more than of 
lower partials, creating a steeper spectral slope and warmer timbre 
with a lower percentage of over-vowel tone color, and relatively 
more under-vowel. Since the under-vowel is most o/f_ten featuring 
the complementary tone color, this results in a vowel migration that 
is internalizing, rounding, and neutralizing.
PRAA.indb   97PRAA.indb   97 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
PRAA.indb   98PRAA.indb   98 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics