
2
Preliminary Basics
Sound
Sound to human perception is comprised of pressure variations of some 
su#ciently elastic medium, typically air; variations that are both abrupt 
enough and of enough intensity to fall within the processing capacity 
of the human sense of hearing, that is, from approximately 20 to 20,000 
oscillations per second within su#cient intensity parameters.
Simple Sounds
If an oscillation of air pressure is simple and periodic (sinusoidal and 
regular), it comprises a single frequency. Such simple sounds rarely 
happen in nature but can be generated by a computer. Most sounds are 
complex, containing multiple additive frequency components.
Noise
Aperiodic (non-patterned, irregular) pressure waves are comprised 
of many frequencies that are out of sync with each other. Being 
non-periodic, there is no regularly repeated pattern of variation, no 
common denominator frequency, rather, a theoretically in/f_inite sweep 
of frequency content, and o/f_ten no clear sense of pitch. Like white 
PRAA.indb   5PRAA.indb   5 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  6
light, which is comprised of all light frequencies, a noise containing 
all audible frequencies at approximately equal intensity is termed 
“white noise. ” A white noise input can be shaped su#ciently by a 
resonator to feature a frequency peak and thus impart a sense of pitch. 
For example, the dominant frequency area of noise-based consonants 
helps to determine their identity: this sequence of fricative noises /s ç 
ʃ/ ranges from higher to lower in “pitch” percept (depending upon their 
articulation).
Musical Tone
Musical tones that have a clear pitch percept are sounds whose 
complex waveforms can be understood as being constructed from 
a set of frequencies, all of which are multiples of a lowest common 
denominator, called the fundamental frequency .1 Each of these 
frequency components is called a harmonic . Together they form a 
sound pressure pattern ( pressure waveform ) that repeats itself at 
the frequency of that lowest common denominator. Our perception 
of the frequency of that complex wave—essentially equivalent to its 
fundamental frequency—is called its pitch. Individual frequencies have 
discrete tone colors to human perception—a relative height, brightness, 
and vowel-like tone color (Howell 2016, 2025). !erefore, the relative 
strength of all of the frequency components—the fundamental and the 
higher frequencies or harmonics that comprise the spectral content 
of a particular sound—determines the “color” or “quality” of that 
tone. Our perception of pitch can be aﬀected by the spectral content 
of the sound—stronger high or low-frequency content can slightly 
raise or lower (sharpen or &atten) our sense of the pitch. In a more 
recent attempt at consensus notation among voice science disciplines, 
harmonic frequencies, which were previously reported as H 1, H 2, H 3, 
etc., are now designated as multiples of the fundamental oscillation; 
that is, as 1 fo, 2fo, 3fo, etc. Since musically notated pitch is logarithmic 
in relation to frequency, the musical intervals between successive 
frequencies of the harmonic series decrease in size, starting with an 
octave, a perfect /f_i/f_th, a perfect fourth, a major third, a minor third, 
etc., as shown in Figure 2.1 .
PRAA.indb   6PRAA.indb   6 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
 Preliminary Basics 7
Voice Acoustics
Voice acoustics are modeled in at least two ways: the non-linear source-
/f_ilter model (steady state) which prioritizes the frequency domain, and 
the transient model which prioritizes the time domain. Both models are 
useful to our understanding, yet necessarily incomplete and to that extent 
“incorrect. ” !e currently more o/f_ten encountered source-/f_ilter model may 
imply an independence and chronological sequence of its components 
that misrepresents the immediacy and complexity of their interactions. 
!e more functionally accurate transient model, by de-emphasizing 
harmonics, may distract attention from the simple predictive relevance 
of the intervallic, interactive relationships between potential harmonic 
frequencies and vocal tract resonances to acoustic registration events.
!is text will incorporate aspects of both models, but will primarily 
feature the non-linear source-/f_ilter model, in which voice is described as 
being comprised of two interactive factors: (1) the voice source —the 
complex waveform arising in the vocal tract from the interaction of the 
periodic modulations of the airstream by vocal fold oscillation, and (2)  a 
/f_ilter function, the immediately overlapping eﬀect of the transfer 
function (sound transfer characteristics) of the vocal tract, which 
selectively strengthens or weakens acoustic energy introduced into it by 
the glottal modulation of air&ow. !e term source-/f_ilter is a semantic 
conundrum. Glottal closures, generating the most abrupt changes in 
pressure, are dominant in exciting the vocal tract air column. A single 
glottal pulse closure excites a broadly “shaped” noise response in the vocal 
tract air column. In other words, a spectrum image of a single pulse does 
Figure 2.1  Intervallic relationship of the ﬁrst eight frequencies of the 
harmonic series of the pitch C3.
PRAA.indb   7PRAA.indb   7 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  8
not generate the harmonic set of a sung pitch; rather, it generates a noise 
that maps the resonance structure of the current vocal tract shape. In this 
way, the so-called /f_ilter (the vocal tract) participates in the creation of the 
initial voice source sound, a /f_ilter-shaped noise. Only the periodic 
reiteration of the glottic impulse subsequently /f_ilters that shaped voice 
source noise further for frequencies that oscillate in sync with its 
periodicity, that is, that are whole integer multiples of its fundamental 
iteration frequency. !at periodicity results in a pitch percept. In that way, 
the vocal fold oscillations participate in both source and /f_ilter functions. 
!e intensities of rebounding frequencies that are in sync with subsequent 
glottic closures are reinforced relative to how o/f_ten they are in sync. 1fo is 
in sync every return oscillation and therefore is potentially strongly 
reinforced; 2fo every second return, so somewhat less strongly; 3 fo every 
third return, 4 fo every fourth return, etc., so that increasingly higher 
harmonics weaken in intensity at a decibel rate per octave in what is 
termed a spectral slope, tilt, or roll-oﬀ. Y et, we must bear in mind that 
the intensities of those returning oscillations from each individual glottal 
impulse had already been “shaped” by the transfer function of the vocal 
tract, such that even before “returning, ” some were already stronger—if 
close to a vocal tract resonance peak, and some weaker—if in the “valley” 
between resonances. Hence, we get a subset of strengthened, radiated 
harmonics, so that only those frequencies that are both near vocal tract 
/f_ilter frequency peaks and are also harmonic with the glottic fundamental 
frequency oscillation survive to be represented in the radiated waveform.
Interactivity
!e di#culty in modeling this process in linear time is akin to the age-
old question of which comes /f_irst, the “chicken or the egg. ” !e accurate 
answer is: both. Glottal action excites the inherent reverberation attributes 
of the shape of the air column in the vocal tract. !us, the sound 
source originates in the vocal tract itself. !is interaction is essentially 
simultaneous, not linear nor chronological. !en that single “resonance-
shaped” noise is /f_iltered further by being periodically reiterated by the 
subsequent glottic impulse closures into a subset of harmonic frequencies. 
In sum, the source is also a /f_ilter and the /f_ilter is also a source—a rather 
PRAA.indb   8PRAA.indb   8 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
 Preliminary Basics 9
completely non-linear, looping interactivity. !e eﬀect of the interactions 
between these two factors across range is the primary concern of acoustic 
vocal pedagogy. !ough in function they are overlappingly interactive, 
for simplicity’s sake, the next chapter (“!e Voice Source”) will explore 
aspects of glottal valve function in isolation: especially the way in which 
various closure characteristics of the glottic oscillation contribute to the 
voice source, thus modeling that part of the acoustic raw material from 
which the voice is built up. A later chapter (Resonances and Formants) 
will explore the characteristics, contribution, and tuning of the vocal tract 
as a /f_ilter, followed by a third chapter (Resonance:Harmonic Interactions) 
that examines how these two factors coordinate and interact across range, 
resulting in acoustic registration.
Note
1 !roughout this text, explanations of the terms printed in bold typeface 
can be found in the 