
15
Corollary Strategies
!is text is focused on practical, applied, acoustic vocal pedagogy. !ough 
the principles presented here are vital, acoustic pedagogy will not function 
well in a pedagogic vacuum, being but one aspect of the whole equation. 
It is prudent for us to remember not to take part of the truth and make 
it the whole truth. All of the things that voice teachers routinely do to 
establish balanced poise of the body, an e#cient, responsive breath-to-
voice connection, &ow phonation, a freely &owing vibrancy, continuity 
and suppleness of line, and so on, continue to be necessary. Acoustic 
pedagogy is a valuable partner in this enterprise and can facilitate vocal 
ease through better interactive coupling of resonation with phonation. A 
few corollary strategies worth noting in this regard are:
Dynamic Control
Avoid inevitable overt crescendi with pitch ascent. If an increase in 
loudness is married to pitch ascent, then probably a corollary excessive 
increase in pressure is as well, and some resultant movement in the 
direction of pressed phonation. !e student should be able to maintain 
the same dynamic level during ascending passages. !is will be easier 
when coupled with acoustic pedagogy since a crescendo on ascent is part 
of the yell instinct, which is primarily about making very loud sounds and 
invites frontal over-articulation of the brighter vowel tone color. Avoiding 
opening the vowel and/or raising the larynx at the fR1: 2fo or the fR1: 1fo 
junctures. Instead, allowing the voice to migrate, turn over, or enter whoop 
timbre will enable ascent without overt crescendo. Also, motivating the 
PRAA.indb   137PRAA.indb   137 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  138
Corollary Strategies
ascent with some meaningful in&ection that does not require a crescendo 
is a productive corollary strategy (see !e Use of Aﬀect below).
Pressure Reduction
A related strategy to counter the tendency to raise breath pressure upon 
ascent is to use active inhalatory checking of the exhalatory forces of the 
respiratory system during phonation, speci/f_ically by attempting more 
expansion of the lower chest/middle of the torso to avoid increasing 
compression of the chest. !is is done with a feeling of strong yet supple, 
buoyant, resilient fullness in the breath supply. It is especially helpful to 
strive for a sense of opening in the chest simultaneous with the perception 
of a narrowing, collecting concentration of the acoustic sensation of 
the tone when entering and traversing the passaggio. !is can best be 
facilitated further by carefully chosen aﬀective responses, such as listening 
with intent concern to something in the distance, or like a child’s concern 
about what’s under the bed, both of which evoke an inhalatory, pressure-
reducing response from the chest wall.
Vibrancy and Flow
Maintaining vibrancy on all pitches, so that there are no intermittent 
straight tones in the exercises nor losses of vibrancy at the seams between 
vowels and/or pitches, also helps avoid pressed phonation and the pressure 
increase that accompanies it. Movement, either of the entire body or with 
arm gestures to model the &ow and shape of the phrase, is a familiar 
strategy to avoid holding or locking up in the respiratory/phonatory 
connection/coordination.
The Use of A/uniFB00ect
Voice is motivated by expression. !is is apparently inherent and primal. 
!e /f_irst thing a newborn does is to inhale. !e very next thing most 
PRAA.indb   138PRAA.indb   138 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
 Corollary Strategies 139
newborns do is to phonate, communicating quite expressively how they 
feel about what just happened. Very few spontaneous phonations in 
life are not caused by the impulse to communicate (exceptions include 
sounds accompanying sneezing, coughing, throat clearing, hiccups). Not 
only emotional quality, but also tessitura and pitch change are motivated 
by expressive in&ection. We change pitch in&ection without planning, 
merely by the expressive intent that is motivating our speaking. In music, 
melodic notation is really a kind of choreography for expressive in&ection. 
!e task of the singer is to intuit the expressive motivation that would 
automatically result in the given melodic contour. Aﬀect can be very 
useful in inspiring in&ective loops across the pitch of turning. In general, 
deepening, internalizing aﬀects are most useful for ascending in&ections 
as well as for upward melodic leaps. For example, speak the phrase, “Oh, 
I get it, ” with an in&ective loop up and back down on the “oh, ” agreeably 
expressing the deep realization of an epiphany. Do this while thinking 
a close [o] and an internalized (in, above, and below) direction into the 
body, as if “drinking the tone. ” Explore allowing aﬀect to motivate subtle, 
spontaneous, simultaneous bodily/gestural/facial expressional responses. 
Since expression motivates both voice and gesture, such uninhibited, 
playful exploration can help facilitate improved acoustic and laryngeal 
registration and su#ciently suppress the yell instinct—during the upward 
pitch in&ections. Aﬀects that encourage greater CT involvement (i.e., a 
lighter, “headier” laryngeal registration) as well as a favorable convergent 
poise of the resonator also can assist upper range excursions. Examples 
of such aﬀects are sweetness, love, reassurance, compassion, sobbiness, 
self-pity, mischief, and self-satisfaction, most of which are in some 
sense internalizing aﬀects. Examples of aﬀects that tend to increase TA 
involvement are authority, con/f_idence, anger, hatred, machismo, and 
projected egotism, that is, aﬀects that are more externally focused. For 
a robust, yet lyric laryngeal registration, enthusiasm, joy, and hilarity are 
motivationally helpful.
The Problem of Micromanagement
Like most physical coordinations, singing is not an activity that responds 
well to micromanagement. Timbral transitions that should occur purely 
PRAA.indb   139PRAA.indb   139 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  140
as the result of pitch change—and the resultant changing relationships 
between harmonics and the /f_irst resonance—ideally should not be 
manipulated or micromanaged. !ey should feel to the singer more like 
acoustic phenomena than like muscular phenomena. While speci/f_ic 
awareness and attention to turning over may initially be needed to 
overcome the yell instinct and habit, the more generalized and holistic the 
eventual motivation, and the subtler the eﬀects of turning, the better. It is 
o/f_ten preferable to stimulate appropriate vowel turning indirectly as a by-
product of a diﬀerent directive or motivation, such as an increase of the 
complementary tone color output target, aﬀect, or a directional gesture. 
Furthermore, once a voice becomes accustomed through repetition 
and habituation to allowing vowels to close at their predicted locations, 
turning over need neither be volitional nor self-conscious.
PRAA.indb   140PRAA.indb   140 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics