
11
Strategies That Encourage 
Tube Stability and a 
Convergent Resonator
The Open Throat
A vocal tract poised for resonance ( chiaroscuro, singer’s formant timbre) 
should be prepared prior to singing by means of a relatively open 
(unconstricted) throat and some degree of tube convergence. However, 
/f_inding this pre-phonatory posture is challenging for students since our 
kinesthesia for throat shape is quite misleading. Most people perceive [ɑ] 
to be the most “open throated” vowel posture and [i] to be the least open 
throated, when the opposite is in fact the case (see Figure 11.1).
Several strategies can circumvent this false kinesthesia: a noiseless 
inhalation, an appropriate F2 frequency target (not too high per vowel), an 
accurate remapping of the throat and tongue, articulatory e#ciency, and 
the use of appropriate motivational aﬀects.
Noiseless Inhalation
A noiseless inhalation  is evidence  of a su#ciently open throat. It can 
be accomplished by a subtle palatal li/f_t (felt more frontally, toward the 
hard palate) accompanied by inhaling in such a way that the front of the 
PRAA.indb   99PRAA.indb   99 7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM7/10/2025   4:38:54 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  100
Strategies for Tube Stability and Resonator Convergence
mouth—the teeth, tongue blade, and hard palate—is cooled rather than 
the throat. Wherever the vocal tract is the coolest, it is either the point of 
the earliest air contact and heat exchange, or the narrowest, since that is 
where air speed will be the quickest and the resultant wind chill eﬀect the 
strongest. Shaping the mouth and throat so that the cooling is in the front 
of the mouth causes the throat to be more open and the resonator more 
convergent.
Lowering the Second Formant 
Frequency
A second strategy to achieve a convergent resonator for a noiseless 
inhalation is to shape the mouth and throat in a way that lowers the “pitch” 
and reduces the intensity of inhalatory noise until it is inaudible. High-
frequency inhalatory noise highlights a raised F2 location, indicating a 
narrowed throat as is typical in whispering. Lowering the “pitch” and 
audibility of inhalatory noise deconstricts the throat, lowers the F2 pitch to 
its more passive pitch location, and allows enough low-frequency content 
to subtly perceive the F1 location as well. !is does not require laryngeal 
depression or any sensation of eﬀort in the neck; rather, it is helped by 
Figure 11.1 Side view of the vocal tract shape of [i] and [ ɑ]. Paradoxical 
to one’s kinesthesia, [i] is open throated and [ɑ] is fairly closed throated.
PRAA.indb   100PRAA.indb   100 7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM
 Strategies for Tube Stability and Resonator Convergence 101
avoiding over-articulation, using internalizing aﬀects such as concerned 
skepticism, and reconceiving dark timbre as being in front and bright 
timbre in back.
Remapping the Throat and Tongue
When making the false open-throated sensation of the “yawny” [ ɑ], the 
location of the back throat wall seems to be behind (and below) the ears, 
an anatomical impossibility. What is most likely being felt are those lateral 
tongue muscles (styloglossus) that attach to the styloid processes beneath 
the ears and retract the tongue toward the back throat wall. Remapping the 
throat wall to its actual location in front of (and below) the ears releases 
tongue retraction, allowing a passively fronted tongue and more throat 
space. Furthermore, many 
singers map the tongue 
like an inverted “L ” that 
descends vertically down to 
the larynx. Although there 
are some lateral muscle 
attachments below to the 
hyoid bone (hyoglossus), 
the largest portion of the 
tongue muscle, forming 
its body, the genioglossus, 
loops back under the 
tongue blade, originating 
at its attachment on the 
inside back of the chin. Remapping the tongue in this way creates more 
independence of tongue and larynx and releases the tongue for greater 
height and passive fronting. (see Figure 11.2.)
Monitoring Tube Length Stability
As explained above, the eﬀect of laryngeal position on tube length 
stability can be monitored—in students whose anatomy lends itself 
Figure 11.2 Mapping the tongue.
PRAA.indb   101PRAA.indb   101 7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  102
to easy identi/f_ication of laryngeal structure—by gently palpating the 
thyrohyoid space (see Figure 8.1 , p. 66). !e thyrohyoid space should 
be relatively open and not rise and close appreciably (as it does in 
swallowing) with pitch ascent. !ough this space varies in size between 
individuals, it may also have been reduced in size by residual tension 
from the unnecessary, habitual activation of swallowing muscles 
during speech production. If such behavior is entrenched, it should 
be patiently but persistently countered and broken, preferably through 
therapy with a licensed, voice-specialized speech-language pathologist 
familiar with appropriate therapies. Eﬀective strategies include massage 
and stretching of the thyrohyoid space, monitoring the looseness and 
openness of the thyrohyoid space during speech production, and 
vocalizing with a passively low larynx and a wide, extended “rolled” 
tongue position. Second, tube length stability can be assessed by 
visually monitoring the location of the Adam’s apple. !is method is 
more useful for biological males, due to their larger average laryngeal 
anatomy, and for those with less &eshy, trimmer necks in which 
structures are more easily visible. Finally, tube length stability can be 
assessed by aurally monitoring the consistency of timbral depth. !is 
is less reliable, since it can be falsely mimicked by various articulatory 
manipulations of tongue and lips, but careful listening and observation 
can reduce this liability.
E/uniFB03ciency of Articulation
Another strategy for maintaining a convergent resonator while singing 
is to minimize the jawing of diction, reducing excessive orality. Neither 
vocal resonance, nor vowel articulation, nor vowel diﬀerentiation require 
exaggerated jaw drop or excessive articulatory change in the lower and 
middle range, as long as there is su#cient internal space. On the contrary, 
vowels can seem fairly close to each other in formation. All of these 
strategies improve throat ease and openness, and a passively settled F1, 
increasing resonator convergence.
PRAA.indb   102PRAA.indb   102 7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM
 Strategies for Tube Stability and Resonator Convergence 103
Use of A/uniFB00ect to Position and 
Stabilize the Resonator
A completely lax vocal structure is vulnerable to sudden changes of 
pressure or situation and is therefore incompatible with optimal 
resonance, extremes of dynamic and range, and control of expressive 
timbral variety. Aﬀect can position and stabilize the vocal apparatus 
more eﬀectively than direct physical manipulation. Speci/f_ic, ample, and 
sincere expressions are typically accompanied by poised, toned vocal 
tract con/f_igurations which are physically stable but stop short of overt 
muscular manipulation or rigidity. Early Italian pedagogues maintained 
that inhaling “through a smile” opened the throat. !is is more a 
matter of the internal, pharyngeal poise of genuine, deep expression 
of pleasure than about lip shape, though facial expression follows 
secondarily. More recently a number of these aﬀective positionings 
of the vocal tract have been tested and documented by voice teacher/
researcher Jo Estill and reported by Kimberly Steinhauer (2008). For 
example, a suppressed laugh may stimulate retraction of the false vocal 
folds, reducing the possibility of pressed phonation. Strong amusement 
or mischief can li/f_t and stabilize the so/f_t palate and comfortably /f_irm 
the pharynx.
Tonal “Placement” Sensations
Any discussion about tonal “placement” sensation, that is, locational 
somatosense, is risky, since the placement of sound is an illusion in the 
/f_irst place, and perception of tonal sensations are somewhat variable 
from individual to individual in the second place. Furthermore, tonal 
sensation is comprised of various components, probably due to a voice 
having multiple resonances and complex pressure waves with multiple 
nodes and antinodes. Attention can therefore be drawn to any single 
aspect of a tone’s overall sensation. Finally, the spectral content (number 
and spacing of harmonics) of low-pitched sounds is dramatically diﬀerent 
PRAA.indb   103PRAA.indb   103 7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  104
from that of high-pitched sounds, as is frequency-dependent vibrotactile 
sensation (Ballantyne 2025), generating changes in somatosense across 
range. It is therefore prudent to proceed with caution and &exibility 
when suggesting tonal “placement” sensations. Nonetheless, there 
is both considerable overlap in historically reported sensation, with 
successful historic pedagogy being rife with the sensorial terminology 
of procedural knowledge —what it feels like to do an activity. !ere is 
also potential acoustic basis for locations of tonal sensations. Consider 
the diﬀerences in acoustic sensation between yelling (2 fo do mina n t fR1, 
with strong upper partials) and whooping (1fo dominant fR1, with weaker 
upper partials). Although we now know that vibrotactile sensation only 
extends to 1000 Hz, the presence of strong, high partials aﬀects overall 
intensity and may thereby strengthen the somatosense of lower, feelable 
spectral content. High frontal sensory feedback is o/f_ten reported by the 
singer, corollary to high spectral content in the sound, even though high-
frequency content is out of range of somatosense (Ballantyne 2025). 
First formant/fundamental frequency-dominant sounds are reported as 
feeling rounder and sensed more centrally in the head and pharyngeal 
column.
Second Formant “Placement” 
Sensations
In this regard, front and back vowel placement sensations are paradoxical. 
It is innate and universal in humans to perceive bright as forward and 
dark as in back. One might then assume that front vowels are felt in 
the front and back vowels in the back. Curiously, almost the opposite 
is the case (see Figure 11.3 ) when acoustically e#cient. !is may be 
due to the locations of the pressure nodes of the standing waveform of 
vowel formants. For a balanced overall timbre and sensation, noticing or 
anticipating the acoustic energy location of the target vowel tone color—
for speech range pitches at least—according to the locations mapped 
below, helps to keep vowels “aligned, ” the tongue dorsum su#ciently 
PRAA.indb   104PRAA.indb   104 7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM7/10/2025   4:38:55 PM
 Strategies for Tube Stability and Resonator Convergence 105
high and fronted, the larynx and /f_irst formant low, the resonator 
convergent, and the timbre balanced or chiaroscuro. !is is more evident 
in non-treble range, since for higher pitches with appropriate vowel 
modi/f_ication (vowel opening), tonal sensations become increasingly 
vertical and centralized in the head.
Figure 11.3 Locational somatosense (“placement”) of target vowel tone 
color in speech articulation. (Vowel articulation shapes are not represented 
in this illustration.)
PRAA.indb   105PRAA.indb   105 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
PRAA.indb   106PRAA.indb   106 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics