
13
Semantic Di/uniFB00erences
It is an understatement to observe that there has always been a variety 
of vocal pedagogic opinion and terminology. To be sure, a teacher’s 
choice of words—given the variety of possible attendant associations and 
implications—can have signi/f_icant pedagogic rami/f_ications. Furthermore, 
the procedural knowledge needed for motor intentions, being subjective 
and sensorial, is di#cult to articulate and requires descriptive &exibility. 
!is leads to inevitable semantic diﬀerences and disagreements. However, 
the extent of disagreement may well be reduced by honest, open dialogue 
and a clearer de/f_inition of terms. Several such controverted terms will be 
discussed below for the sake of clarity and good will.
Cover Terminology
As has been pointed out earlier, the primary turn of the voice from voce 
aperta to voce chiusa at the fR1:2fo crossing is associated with the historic 
terms vocal cover and covered. !is nomenclature unfortunately has 
signi/f_icant baggage and does not mean the same thing to all teachers or 
past great singers. In a public master class, Italian tenor Luciano Pavarotti 
demonstrated and used the term cover—in the opinion of this author—
for the same phenomenon that this text refers to as the passive vowel 
migration that accompanies a well-executed, resonant turn of the voice. 
(See Appendix 5: Y ouTube Examples: Example 7, p. 184.) Furthermore, in 
another interview, Pavarotti described cover as “closing, ” a darker timbre, 
and more elegant (See Y ouTube Examples: Example 8); and /f_inally, in a 
third interview, went as far as to claim that if you do not cover, you are “not 
PRAA.indb   115PRAA.indb   115 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  116
Semantic Di/uniFB00erences
a real tenor” (See Y ouTube Examples: Example 9). Spanish tenor Alfredo 
Kraus maintained that he didn’t believe in cover, and though his timbre 
was in general on the bright and at times open side, his voice did in fact 
turn over at or near predictable locations. !ere are many such variant 
views and uses of terms to be found, expressed by people that nonetheless 
seem to sing and/or teach successfully. Some prefer to eliminate or at 
least reduce any awareness of the passaggio or passaggio events. Indeed, 
when well executed, sensations accompanying the turn will usually seem 
subtle, acoustic, even automatic, rather than muscular, enabling an ease of 
production. Others, such as American tenor Rockwell Blake (in a public 
master class), described the zona di passaggio—as Garcia did—as a matter 
of “adding dark timbre” in order to preserve an adult sound (See Appendix 
5: Y ouTube Examples: Example 10). It is fairly easy to appreciate that an 
open yell will sound younger, less elegant, immature, shallower, and more 
strained in timbre. Allowing the fR1:2fo turn adds or retains depth and 
color, results in a greater percentage of the “under-vowel” tone color, and 
may indeed seem darker in timbre to the singer, but need not sacri/f_ice ring 
to any great extent for the audience, and will enhance a more organized 
version of timbral ring than that of the yell.
Connecting Terms with Acoustic 
Strategies
Just below the point of the fR1:2fo crossing there are at least three possible 
strategies that parallel the three strategies listed earlier just above the turn 
(see Resonance Strategies between Turning and Whoop, p. 52):
 1) !e /f_irst resonance//f_irst formant could be actively lowered to 
precipitate the turn earlier/lower. It is precisely this type of 
heavy c o v e r—accompanied by a more dramatic darkening and 
modi/f_ication of the vowel—which many /f_ind objectionable. 
Unfortunately, this strategy is equated by some teachers and 
singers with the very de/f_inition of cover. !e physical correlates 
to this approach include a closer vowel pronunciation, a lowered 
larynx, and rounded or even trumpeted (extended) lips—in other 
words, active tube lengthening and vowel closing.
PRAA.indb   116PRAA.indb   116 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
 Semantic Di/uniFB00erences117
 2) !e /f_irst resonance//f_irst formant location could be deliberately 
maintained, allowing the passive migration that occurs as 2fo slips 
above fR1 as the sung pitch is raised. !is is what the term cover 
means in this text. !e vowel is allowed to migrate smoothly to 
a slightly closer neighbor by means of pitch change, not shape 
change. !e original vocal tract and vowel shape and internal 
height is in fact deliberately maintained through the passaggio, 
while the vowel quality and locational somatosense is allowed to 
migrate subtly. With this approach it is important not to collapse 
the sense of internal height (top back “corners” near the jaw joints) 
or vowel shape, not to “give in” to the vowel migration with shape 
changes, nor to form the speech-level shape of the resultant tone 
color or more neutral under-vowel as if it were the target vowel 
(unless a more dramatic turn is desired). !e vocal tract form is 
most eﬀectively maintained by sustaining the motivating aﬀect.
 3) !e /f_irst resonance//f_irst formant could be either deliberately or 
instinctively raised by vowel opening, extending open timbre 
upward and delaying the turn of the voice. !is can only be done 
well if diction allows and just for a few pitches higher without 
turning into an open yell.
Furthermore, the terms cover and covered, while accurately describing the 
subjective procedural perception that the sound feels more internalized 
and less exposed, might imply a muting or mu)ing of the sound, qualities 
not usually desired. For these reasons, most teachers avoid these terms 
and substitute instead “turning over” and “turned over” as well as “the 
turn of the voice. ” In working out the transition zone with a young non-
treble singer, it may be temporarily necessary and useful to overcorrect a 
strong yell instinct with strategy number one: a deliberate precipitation of 
the turn, by lowering fR1 through moving to a closer vowel and/or slightly 
longer tube. !is maneuver may result in a tone that is too dark, dull, 
and potentially too heavy for a /f_inal product. !at would require eventual 
rebalancing. Subsequently, attempting a smooth “timbral glissando” on a 
single pitch—from an open timbre slowly and smoothly through the turn 
to a close timbre—may pass through an ideal timbral balance along the 
way. For example: have a tenor voice sing the following progression: [ɛ ɪ e i]  
on a D4, gradually and simultaneously closing the vowel and deepening 
the timbre by elevating the tongue dorsum in back. If the larynx is stably 
PRAA.indb   117PRAA.indb   117 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  118
low, the timbre should close either on the [e] or between the [ ɪ] and the 
[e], but most de/f_initely by the [i]. A sequence of words containing those 
vowels may facilitate naturalness of expression and articulation: “bet, bit, 
bait, beet, ” or “bed, bid, bayed, bead. ” !en try this exercise on more or 
less open versions of the same vowel. If very near its pitch of turning, 
it should be possible to perform a vowel in open, turning, and turned/
close timbres. All of these explorations will bene/f_it from some expressive 
motivation, since expression coordinates phonation at a deep level.
Timbral Terminology: Close or 
Closed
Both adjectives close /klo ʊs/ and closed /klo ʊzd/ are found in phonetic 
literature to describe vowels with a low /f_irst formant and convergent 
resonator shape. !ere are advantages and disadvantages with either 
term: closed is more properly the opposite of open since close means near 
rather than closed. On the other hand, a vowel can be more or less open, 
but can something be more or less closed? To use an analogy, a door is 
either open or closed. Once it is open, it can be more or less open, but it 
can’t be more or less closed. Closed does not allow for degrees of a quality. 
Furthermore, close /kloʊz/ can also be a verb, like open, and as such is 
useful as a pedagogic directive.
Physically the terms originate from the degree of closeness of the hump 
of the tongue dorsum to the hard palate. A close vowel has the tongue 
hump close to the hard palate, and an open vowel does not. !e tongue 
can be closer or less close, but it doesn’t achieve any physical state that 
could literally be called closed with vowel articulation, since with vowels 
there is always some space between the tongue and palate for air and 
sound to &ow out of the mouth.
!e International Phonetic Association uses the term close /kloʊs/. 
!is author has chosen to follow that usage, personally /f_inding it more 
compatible with the pedagogic concept and use of degrees of closeness 
(close, more or less closely), opening or closing a vowel further, open and 
close timbre, and so on. Arguments can be made against close for the term 
closed. It is hoped that this semantic diﬀerence will neither diminish 
appreciation of the concept nor prevent its useful practical application.
PRAA.indb   118PRAA.indb   118 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
 Semantic Di/uniFB00erences119
Open and Close
A further conundrum exists with the terms open a n d  close, having to 
do with their use for two diﬀerent, though related conditions: open and 
close vowel designations and open and close acoustic registers. Open 
and close vowels were described immediately above. Open and close 
registers have to do with harmonic:resonance relationships, speci/f_ically 
whether or not the second harmonic of a sound has surpassed the /f_irst 
resonance of the vowel being sung. Paradoxically, an open vowel can be 
sung in close timbre if the sung pitch is su#ciently high, that is, less than 
an octave below the formant of the vowel being sung. An [a] is the most 
open vowel but will be in close timbre above ca. F4 in most voices and in 
whoop timbre at and above ca. F5. And [i] is the closest cardinal vowel but 
can be in open timbre below ca. E3, again depending upon the voice type. 
!ese relationships can be dependably, predictably charted by voice type, 
as in earlier Figures 6.4 and 8.2, and in Appendices II & III.
Laryngeal Register Terminology
!is discussion has a long history! Many terms have been employed in the 
voice science literature of the past /f_i/f_ty years: heavy and light mechanisms, 
modal and lo/f_t, along with chest, head, and falsetto.
Vibrational Mechanisms1 versus 
Head and Chest
!e most current (though not yet prevalent) designations for vocal 
registers are:
 1) Mechanism 0 for vocal fry/pulse
 2) Mechanism 1 for thick vocal folds, TA involvement in vibration, 
“chest voice” (higher contact quotient: greater than 50 percent)
 3) Mechanism 2 for thin vocal folds, vocal ligament vibration, “head 
voice” (lower contact quotient: less than 40 percent)
PRAA.indb   119PRAA.indb   119 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  120
 4) Mechanism 3 for whistle register, epithelial vibration.
!ese designations reference declarative knowledge of the varieties of 
vocal fold tissue physiology involved rather than the procedural knowledge 
conveyed by the locational somatosense of vibration (head, chest). !ey 
arise from particular muscular functions and shapings, plus aerodynamic 
and acoustic factors. Mechanism one is thought to be TA dominant, 
involving the vocalis muscle in its vibration. Mechanism two is thought to 
be CT dominant, involving the vibration of the vocal ligament. Recently 
mechanism three has been observed to only involve vibration of the 
epithelial cover when above E6 (Titze 2025). !ese demarcations appear 
to be due to the stretch/strain resistance of diﬀerent kinds of tissue, which 
both facilitate and limit the frequencies at which they can be brought into 
and sustain vibration. To some extent, the mechanisms also have attendant 
acoustic characteristics, with thicker folds and higher contact quotients 
having more high spectral content and buzziness, and thinner folds with 
lower contact quotients having fewer partials and less auditory roughness. 
In certain circumstances, toggling from one mechanism to another may 
be triggered by destabilizing acoustic factors.
!is author happily embraces the new terminology, especially for its 
use in declarative discussions of the eﬀect of vibrational characteristics on 
spectral slope and timbre. Vibrational mechanism presents as binary in 
novice singers and tends to remain so in almost all advanced singers that 
have been measured with EGG. !at is to say, though excellent singers 
o/f_ten accomplish smooth perceptual aural transitions, few singers 
accomplish an absolutely smooth, gradual shi/f_t in vocal fold shape and 
contact quotient. However, thyroarytenoid and cricothyroid muscle 
involvement across range is not purely binary (on/oﬀ). Both are involved 
to varying extents in many of the vocal fold shapes we use. And there are 
also shapes for which one or the other is mostly or entirely passive.
!ere are some who, in their zeal for the advantages of this new 
terminology, are rather intolerant of—even indignant toward—use of the 
old. !is is unnecessary. Some continued use of the older terminology has 
this in its favor: most literature prior to the recent decades used it. Unless 
we refuse to read the historic pedagogic literature, we will at least need to 
be able to understand and translate these terms. Furthermore, the terms 
head and chest arose out of the real, commonly shared physical vibrotactile 
sensations of procedural knowledge. Human perception of such 
PRAA.indb   120PRAA.indb   120 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
 Semantic Di/uniFB00erences121
biofeedback will not disappear with new nomenclature. In that regard, the 
terms head and chest are general enough in location to allow teachers 
latitude in specifying locational somatosense further or not. Finally, it is 
pedagogically useful to have terms that can be adapted to indicate degrees 
of a quality, such as “headier” and “chestier. ” (One-ier and two-ier just don’t 
work.) We can also add to our procedural output target descriptors the 
registration-relevant psychoacoustic percepts, “rougher” and “smoother. ”
Some have argued that the old terms indicate a gender bias. On the 
contrary, we all have heads and chests and can experience related locational 
somatosensory percepts. Only within pedagogies that strongly associate 
one or the other with a gender, and mistakenly limit by gender the use of 
its complement, is there potential bias. !ere is no inherent bias in the 
words themselves, only this possible associative one, which is surely a 
dying association. Even babies have and use both laryngeal registers. So 
do well-trained singers of any gender identity.
!is author anticipates and welcomes increasing usage of the 
terminology of laryngeal mechanisms. In our acceptance of the new, there 
is no real need either to erase or avoid historic terminology. It is a fruitless, 
divisive battle, not worth the trouble, and not likely to be won.
Mix and Falsetto
Another semantic dilemma involves the terms mix and falsetto. Mix is used 
in musical theater circles as well as in some Western classical pedagogies 
to refer to an area of cooperation between TA and CT muscles. It seems 
perhaps more o/f_ten to be used to describe a variant of mechanism one, that 
is, to be TA dominant, but with less thickness or vertical phase diﬀerence 
and with a squaring up of the opposing vocal fold vertical surfaces, which 
facilitates ease through a lower phonation threshold pressure. !ere are no 
new muscles involved, and therefore there is no separate mix register per 
se, but it does seem to indicate a subtle but important acoustically induced 
valve behavior and timbral distinction and a less heavy production. !is 
facilitates extending the buzzier timbre of mechanism one and competent 
vocal fold closure at higher pitches without resorting to the excessive 
levels of transglottal pressure diﬀerence and glottal resistance that occur 
in pressed phonation.
PRAA.indb   121PRAA.indb   121 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  122
Falsetto is o/f_ten understood to be a breathy version of mechanism two, 
with a glottal gap between the arytenoids allowing air leakage and a 
resultant weaker phonation. To others, falsetto is analogous to an e#cient 
non-breathy mechanism two, something that some have called “reinforced 
falsetto. ” !e migration of auditory roughness across range can be a 
helpful metric, both for training smooth laryngeal registration as well as 
for labeling its transitional levels. It focuses on intention and perception of 
the output targets rather than on control of their physiologic mechanisms, 
in agreement with the recommendations of motor learning research. If we 
understand “chest mix” to be a lighter extension of mechanism one via a 
migration of its auditory roughness to a less coarse buzziness, “head mix” 
to be a version of mechanism two that has both competent closure and an 
even more re/f_ined “sizzle, ” and falsetto to be the smooth-timbred 
culmination of mechanism two, fully realized with no auditory roughness, 
we might be able to overcome semantic diﬀerences and continue 
pedagogically productive conversation.
Belting and Yelling
!is text refers to belting by de/f_inition as a skillful form of yelling. !is 
is not intended to be pejorative nor to suggest that eﬀective belters are 
just yelling in the manner found, for example, at sports events. !is is 
essentially an acoustic observation. !e same basic acoustic strategy 
that is employed in the yell is also employed in belting: a /f_irst resonance 
tracking of the second harmonic. However, unskillful yelling is done at 
injurious transglottal pressure diﬀerence and glottal resistance levels, 
o/f_ten with noise elements that further raise health risks, both of which 
can result in hoarseness. Well-performed belting is sustainable and does 
not result in hoarseness or other unhealthy consequences, even with the 
heavy performance schedules of the musical theater industry. Any high-
energy vocalism (operatic singing included)—if done poorly, for too long, 
within too short of a time span, and without su#cient recovery time—can 
lead to fatigue, in&ammation, and further health issues. !ere is, however, 
another justi/f_ication for relating belting to yelling. One of the reasons that 
belting and its relatives in many forms of world music are so compellingly 
expressive is precisely their natural connection to yelling. We yell in times 
PRAA.indb   122PRAA.indb   122 7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM7/10/2025   4:38:56 PM
 Semantic Di/uniFB00erences123
of high energy, high drama, and high stakes. Belting takes full advantage of 
that natural expressive association. Anyone who teaches healthy belting, 
of course, must exercise great care in distinguishing that skill from raw, 
injurious yelling. Some may prefer to use the term “call” to avoid implying 
the rough force that can attach to the term “yelling. ” Nonetheless, from a 
purely acoustic point of view, the main tuning factor that de/f_ines both belt 
and yell is fR1:2fo tracking, hence their associative connection in this text 
on vocal acoustics. Belting is, however, a modi/f_ied, skillful, and—when 
properly done—completely healthy form of the yell acoustic strategy.
Note
1 Some texts use the word mode instead of mechanism. !e voice science 
community prefers mechanism since mode has been used for other 
aspects of vocal fold vibrational physiology (eigenmodes). I defer to that 
preference in this edition.
PRAA.indb   123PRAA.indb   123 7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM
PRAA.indb   124PRAA.indb   124 7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM7/10/2025   4:38:57 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics