
1
Introduction
Voice teachers have been addressing vocal acoustics in some manner for as 
long as there has been voice instruction. Given the history of excellence in 
singing, singers, and teachers, the historic empirical approach clearly has 
had success. However, our scienti/f_ic knowledge about and understanding 
of vocal acoustics have grown exponentially in the last sixty to eighty 
years, and will certainly continue to be re/f_ined by the growing number 
of ongoing collaborations between voice scientists and voice teachers 
interested in voice science. With sophisticated yet inexpensive sound 
analysis technology now widely available, more voice teachers are curious 
about its potential value for the studio and the practice room, and seeing 
the need to understand and be well-informed about the acoustics of vocal 
registration—at the very least, as a means to more e#cient pedagogy, but 
also as an essential element of voice pedagogy courses. !ere are several 
excellent texts available that delve deeply into the physics of vocal acoustics 
(See Selected References), and on instructional technology and pedagogic 
application, but there is still a need for texts that explain the pedagogic 
implications of acoustics in a manner accessible to the majority of 
teachers and students. !is book represents an attempt to place principles 
emerging from voice science in a clear and practical pedagogic context for 
voice teachers and voice pedagogy students. An eﬀort has been made to 
distill from the science of vocal acoustics those factors that are essential 
for teachers at the beginning of the twenty-/f_irst century to understand 
and that are most likely to be productive for improving our pedagogic 
e#ciency, and to present them in language that is generally accessible. It 
is the author’s view that while re/f_inement of our scienti/f_ic understanding 
of vocal acoustics will surely continue, the basic elements presented here 
will be immediately helpful and are su#ciently well-established to survive 
PRAA.indb   1PRAA.indb   1 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  2
Introduction
inevitable further developments. !is text will be limited to acoustic 
information that is relevant to teaching and will not address in any detail 
non-acoustic aspects of singing. It is also based primarily on the historic 
aesthetics and practices of the non-ampli/f_ied Western classical singing 
tradition, which necessitates optimal acoustic e#ciency to sustainably 
achieve phonations across a wide range that can /f_ill large venues. Since 
all singers inhabit relatively similar internal acoustic “landscapes, ” many 
of the acoustic principles presented here are relevant for and applicable to 
other vocal styles. !is edition will elaborate further on those connections.
Tools
First a brief word about technology in the studio: !ere is a growing array 
of so/f_tware applications available for studio use. For those who object to 
the amount of voice science and instructional technology invading the 
studio, consider these observations: the teacher who can’t teach a good 
voice lesson without it won’t be able to teach a good voice lesson with 
it. Most technology is merely sophisticated feedback that can give more 
concrete evidence of what good teachers were already listening or looking 
for. !is is no diﬀerent in principle than the use of a mirror, an audio 
recording device, or a video recording device. !e teacher is still just as 
dependent on a re/f_ined ability to hear, sense, and observe what the student 
is doing, but instructional technology can improve the speci/f_icity of 
instruction, the learning curve of students, quickly settle arguments over 
sounds just made, and generally make teaching more e#cient. Of course, 
one can certainly imagine use of the same technology becoming intrusive, 
too prominent, or ine#cient if not well managed, much like an obsession 
with the mirror might be.
Later chapters will explain two excellent instruments of instructional 
technology: the Madde voice synthesizer and the VoceVista Video Pro 
sound analysis program. A number of points in the text will be illustrated 
by suggested explorations using the Madde voice synthesizer (see 
Appendix 1, p. 172). Possible studio uses of VoceVista will be explained 
and illustrated in a subsequent chapter. In order to understand and 
eﬀectively use these instructional tools, the teacher and student will need 
a basic understanding of vocal acoustics. Readers su#ciently informed 
PRAA.indb   2PRAA.indb   2 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
 Introduction 3
about harmonics, resonances, and formants are encouraged to read the 
instructional technology chapters /f_irst and then do each Madde exploration 
as it is suggested in the text. (Seeing and hearing the Madde explorations 
in some cases dramatically and convincingly illustrate the principle being 
discussed.) Others may /f_ind it more productive to return to the Madde 
explorations only a/f_ter /f_irst processing the chapters on harmonics, 
resonances, and formants. Madde is designed for PC computers and 
requires additional so/f_tware for use on Apple computers.
Semantics: Language and Models
All language is metaphorical or representative, not the thing itself. It 
involves assigned and agreed-upon labels for things or concepts. Similarly, 
explanatory models are simpli/f_ied representations of more complex 
phenomena and are used to assist more summary understanding. As 
simpli/f_ications, models deliberately exclude some information in order to 
highlight overarching principles. !erefore, “all models are wrong; some 
are useful” (George Box, statistician). !is principle will obtain in the 
models of acoustics used in this text—being incomplete simpli/f_ications, 
they are heuristic: not absolutely true in all details, but nonetheless useful 
for general understanding and practical application.
Knowledge
Our knowledge base for physical activity is of two kinds: declarative 
knowledge, which describes the objective, physical realities involved; 
and procedural knowledge , which describes the subjective, sensorial 
experiences of and motivations for the phenomena. Objective, declarative 
knowledge involves things that can be measured, documented, and 
subsequently reported with clarity. It is, therefore, accessible to scienti/f_ic 
investigation. However, the objective description of function is of limited 
value as a vocal intention, since motor behavior is best organized by 
simple output targets rather than by complex micromanagement of the 
parts or processes involved. A/f_ter all, all human experience is subjective, 
being mediated through our senses and interpreted by our brain as 
PRAA.indb   3PRAA.indb   3 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  4
percepts. Procedural knowledge, simply put, is what it feels like to do the 
thing—in this case, to sing well. Said another way, procedural knowledge 
is quite plainly ability, skill—the brain guiding the body with stored 
sensorial memories reactivated as intentions of motor behavior. Being 
subjective and sensorial, they are challenging to articulate or describe, yet 
they constitute precisely the kind of knowledge that the singer needs and 
which the teacher must somehow convey. Successful historic pedagogy is 
rife with procedural terminology: terms that are descriptive of functional 
sound and somatosense: head voice, chest voice, pharyngeal voice, whistle 
voice, covering, appoggio, girare, voce aperta, voce chiusa , and so on. 
Our only viable option as teachers, besides demonstration, is to use the 
representative, metaphorical, subjective vehicle of descriptive language 
and models. Vocal directives must be simple enough to execute as motor 
intentions. However, the models and metaphors we choose bene/f_it greatly 
from being informed not only by successful historic pedagogy but also by 
the growing body of increasingly accurate declarative knowledge—that 
is, by science-informed pedagogy. Declarative knowledge can inform 
procedural choices, adding valuable speci/f_icity, but procedural knowledge 
is needed for eﬀective motor intentions, those o/f_ten subconscious, 
sensorial messages from the brain to the body that organize its physiologic 
responses.
PRAA.indb   4PRAA.indb   4 7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM7/10/2025   4:38:47 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics Preliminary Basics