
17
Instructional Technology
As mentioned in the introduction, instructional technology is now 
readily available, inexpensive, and rather user-friendly. Each application 
or program does take some training to understand its most appropriate 
uses. Other texts have written more extensively on this, but this chapter 
will give a summary of two instruments and their use.
The Madde Voice Synthesizer
!roughout this text, explorations using the Madde [m ɑdːə] voice 
synthesizer have been recommended to illustrate both aurally and visually 
various aspects of vocal acoustics. !is author considers Madde to be a 
most helpful tool for vocal acoustics explanations ( Figure 17.1 ). It is a 
free shareware product from Swedish engineer Svante Granqvist and is 
programmable to represent any voice type on any vowel singing any pitch 
within a standard keyboard. Madde clearly displays both harmonics  (with 
numbered lines) and formants (with shaded bands) above a keyboard, 
an especially musician-friendly feature. !is format provides the 
simplest, most direct way to model and explain to students the eﬀects of 
harmonic:resonance interactions so crucial to acoustic vocal registration. 
Madde can also be useful for occasional explanations in the studio and 
even for audio demonstrations of harmonic:resonance interactions and 
the passive vowel migrations that accompany them, but it is especially 
well-suited for voice pedagogy classes. Madde can be used to illustrate 
(1) the eﬀect of the sung pitch on the number of harmonics available for 
resonation per primary audible range, (2) the roll-oﬀ (tilt) in power of the 
PRAA.indb   145PRAA.indb   145 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  146
Instructional Technology
source harmonics, (3) the eﬀect of the presence or absence of resonances/
formants, and (4) the aural eﬀects of all harmonic:resonance interactions.
Limitations of Madde
Madde and Modes of Phonation
Madde can roughly model diﬀerent vibrational mechanisms (head or 
chest) by varying the tilt or “roll-oﬀ ” of the voice source (see Appendix 1: 
Madde Exploration 2) and, to some extent, modes of phonation (pressed, 
breathy, &ow). However, since the voice source input of harmonics in 
Madde is always “clean” or noise-free, it cannot accurately model breathy 
phonation, which typically has an air-noise element. Since no muscles are 
involved in its voice source, neither can it really model all of the timbral 
changes that accompany pressed phonation.
Madde and Non-Linearity
Madde is strictly linear (non-interactive) and therefore cannot model 
the eﬀects of non-linearity on the voice source or on resonation. In other 
Figure 17 .1 Madde voice synthesizer, displaying voice source harmonics 
(numbered lines) and formants (shaded bands) just above the keyboard.
PRAA.indb   146PRAA.indb   146 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
 Instructional Technology 147
words, the resonances/formants one programs do not cause changes in 
the source input—as can happen in a human voice—but merely selectively 
resonate its harmonic spectral content.
Madde and Vibrato
Since Madde’s programmed vibrato cycles—though adjustable in rate 
and extent—are essentially uniform, audible pitch undulations are more 
apparent and distracting than in a real voice with an ideal vibrato. With 
actual voices, minute waveform variability can help to create a perceptual 
“singleness of pitch, ” if rate and extent parameters are within certain limits. 
!at is to say, a tone can be consistently vibrant (have measurable, regular 
frequency undulations) without perceivable pitch undulation. Bear in mind 
that pitch is not the same as frequency. It is the term for our perception of 
frequency. In a real voice, if the vibrato frequency is close to six per second 
and the extent (excursion above and below the target frequency) is a semi-
tone or less, while we perceive that something is moving, the pitch sounds 
stable and steady rather than wobbly or tremulous. One student described 
his perception upon hearing an ideal vibrato as “movement within the pitch 
rather than movement of the pitch. ” !is is analogous to our perceiving a 
smoothly moving picture when, in fact, twenty-four still frames per second 
are &ashed on the screen in the theater. Perceptual and actual phenomena 
diverge. Madde does not replicate this “singleness of pitch” phenomenon.
In spite of these few limitations, because of its musician-friendly keyboard 
display and general excellence of design, Svante Granqvist’s Madde voice 
synthesizer is an outstanding instructional tool—one of the best available to 
date—for acoustics presentations/explanations for undergraduate voice 
pedagogy classes or for any audience. It is recommended that you download 
and use Madde for the explorations described in this text for the best 
understanding of the principles and sounds being discussed. Madde can be 
downloaded to PCs or to Macs that can handle Windows applications from 
the following site:
http://www .tolvan .com1
Spectrography
!e instructional technology that is the simplest to read and so far the 
most useful for the voice studio is real-time spectrography . Real-time 
PRAA.indb   147PRAA.indb   147 7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM7/10/2025   4:38:58 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  148
means that the analysis is simultaneous and the image display immediate—
essentially as the sound is happening, that is, in real-time. Spectrography is 
an analysis of sound that isolates the frequency components of the sound 
and displays them on the vertical dimension, with higher frequencies 
lying higher across the graph, and lower frequencies lying lower. Time 
moves horizontally across the graph, with the present instant entering on 
the right edge of the screen and then scrolling to the le/f_t. Saved images are 
then read from le/f_t (earliest sound) to right (most recent sound). A third 
dimension—the intensity or power of the frequency components—is 
displayed on a color or darkness scale. Of all the ways we analyze and graph 
sound, so far, the spectrographic image is visually the most analogous to 
sound over time, and therefore the most approachable, understandable, 
and even intuitive for students. With minimal initial explanation, students 
can both see and hear important characteristics of their singing in the 
playback, leading to productive commentary or discussion. !is author 
experimented with real-time spectrography starting in 1989 and had the 
privilege of using spectrography in his voice studio from 1993 until 2019. 
It was as ever-present as the mirror on the wall and was referred to at a 
comparable rate—that is, only as needed and when helpful.
VoceVista
Real-time spectrography is readily available from various sources in 
various forms, including the deservedly popular VoceVi sta Video Pro  
program, developed by Donald Miller, Harm Schutte, and their research 
team in Groningen, Netherlands, and managed and updated by engineer 
Bodo Maas. (Figure 17.2). If the program’s analysis parameters are set to 
display a narrow frequency bandwidth (see De/f_initions), which is the 
default setting for Voce Vista, individual harmonics of the fundamental 
frequency are modeled and easily seen &owing horizontally across 
the screen, and therefore characteristics of vibrato and vocal line can 
be monitored and evaluated. While broad bandwidth  settings more 
accurately model the individual impulses of the voice and show vocal 
tract formants even more clearly, formants are usually reasonably 
apparent with the narrow width default settings, especially for low and 
mid-range pitches, such that overall resonance and resonance balance  
can also be monitored with them. Durational parameters can be set to 
PRAA.indb   148PRAA.indb   148 7/10/2025   4:38:59 PM7/10/2025   4:38:59 PM
 Instructional Technology 149
save short segments of time for near immediate retrieval, listening, and 
viewing. Continuity and consistency of vibrancy, brevity of consonantal 
interruption, and consistency of resonance balance, among other things, 
can be readily seen and heard on playback.
Power Spectra
If more detailed display or research is needed, a power spectrum  
display, and even electroglottography  (EGG) can be used (both 
available with VoceVista). Power spectra display power or intensity 
on the vertical and frequency (spectrum) on the horizontal. Unlike 
spectrography, which graphs segments of time on the horizontal, power 
spectra usually only graph an instant (either the present instant or an 
instant selected from a saved spectrograph) of time. Power spectra can 
therefore show formants, harmonics, and their relative strengths in 
great detail ( Figure 17.3 ).
Figure 17 .2 VoceVista real-time spectrography, with frequency on the 
vertical, time on the horizontal, intensity on the color scale, and the 
pressure waveform displayed above.
PRAA.indb   149PRAA.indb   149 7/10/2025   4:38:59 PM7/10/2025   4:38:59 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  150
Electroglottography (EGG)
Electroglottography is a charting of the amount of glottal contact in 
each vibratory cycle, from which a closed quotient (percentage of time 
the glottis is closed), contact quotient (amount of glottal contact), and 
laryngeal register can be postulated. Data is collected by means of a small 
electric current passing between two electrodes placed one on either side 
of the larynx. !e greater the conductivity between them, the greater the 
vocal fold contact. Chest voice has greater vocal fold contact and a larger 
contact quotient than head voice. !erefore, one can—roughly at least—
estimate vibrational mechanism from the contact quotient.
!ough EGG signals can give very speci/f_ic information about laryngeal 
registration and its coordination with acoustic factors, both of which are 
essential in ongoing research, it is not yet clear that what electroglottography 
adds is su#ciently crucial to application to be necessary for regular weekly 
lesson use. For more information on EGG (as well as for any matters of 
vocal resonance), this author highly recommends Donald Miller’s 
Figure 17 .3 VoceVista with waveform (top left), spectrograph (bottom 
left), and power spectrum (right) displayed. The vertical time cursor on 
the left selects the moment being displayed on the power spectrum. The 
short horizontal frequency cursor on the spectrograph (the third harmonic 
from the bottom) becomes the vertical cursor on the power spectrum.
PRAA.indb   150PRAA.indb   150 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
 Instructional Technology 151
Resonance in Singing.  (See Selected References). Suggested uses of 
VoceVista in the studio will be addressed below.
Studio Uses of Voce Vista
VoceVista is a powerful, well-designed tool for voice analysis and research. 
As argued earlier, real-time spectrography—which is available from various 
sources including VoceVista—is currently the most intuitively analogous way 
to graph a number of pedagogically relevant sound characteristics visually. 
With frequency on the vertical, time on the horizontal, and intensity on 
the color or brightness scale, its display is understandable and readable by 
students a/f_ter minimal training. Very practical matters of vocal line are readily 
apparent: continuousness and consistency of vibrancy, dynamic shaping, 
duration of any interruption of the tonal &ow, and at least in a general sense, 
timbral balance. !is author therefore has real-time spectrography running 
essentially continuously in lessons as the standard technology for playback. 
If a more detailed look at the relative strength of harmonics is needed, 
a screen display that includes power spectrum can be selected. A power 
spectrum typically displays one instant of time, with power (intensity) on the 
vertical and frequency (spectrum) on the horizontal. VoceVista very handily 
coordinates the spectrograph display with the power spectrum display so 
that one can scroll through the time dimension of the spectrograph and 
examine each instant in detail on the power spectrum.
Spectrographic display is best for assessing:
 1) Vibrancy (immediacy, consistency, continuity)
 2) Vocal line (tonal and general timbral continuity)
 3) General sense of overall resonance
 4) General presence and strength of the singer’s formant cluster
!ings that spectrography is not best suited for include:
 1) Close comparisons between fairly similar vowels (power spectra 
are better).
 2) Subtle timbral distinctions.
 3) Determining which sounds are correct (your trained ear decides. 
!e picture may or may not show evidence, depending upon the 
nature and degree of diﬀerence).
PRAA.indb   151PRAA.indb   151 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  152
 4) Best laryngeal height (your ear, eye, and the student’s freedom of 
function are better).
 5) Precise resonance:harmonic interactions (power spectra and your 
ear are better).
!at said, the audio playback of VoceVista that accompanies the visual 
display is good enough to “complete the picture” of most issues being 
discussed. Ultimately, it is the sound—and accompanying freedom and 
comfort of sensation—that determine the success of the singing being 
evaluated. Spectrography doesn’t tell you what is good, bad, or indiﬀerent. 
It simply displays what is. !e teacher and student look, listen and discuss 
to determine what the sounds and the graph are re&ecting.
Note
1 Unfortunately at publication date, Madde no longer works with every PC 
operating system, nor with Mac computers.
PRAA.indb   152PRAA.indb   152 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
Deﬁnitions
Absolute spectral tone color: the characteristic of individual frequencies 
to be perceived by humans as having a speci/f_ic vowel-like quality, relative 
height, and relative darkness or brightness. For example, low-frequency 
harmonics have a dark [~u]-like quality; high frequencies have a bright 
[~i]-like quality. Vowels are perceived to be a combination of the absolute 
spectral tone colors of the harmonics being reinforced by the /f_irst and 
second resonances of the vocal tract and featured as the /f_irst and second 
formants in the radiated sound. !is approximation of a vowel quality is 
indicated by a tilde plus the vowel. (Howell 2016)
Acoustic coupling: coupling of a vocal tract resonance with a source 
harmonic.
Acoustic registration: the timbral transitions that occur as a result of 
resonance:harmonic interactions. All acoustic register events involve 
harmonic interactions with the /f_irst resonance. Many also involve 
interaction with the second resonance.
Acoustic registers: vocal registers due exclusively to relationships between 
acoustic parameters, speci/f_ically the harmonics of the fundamental 
frequency relative to the /f_irst resonance of the vocal tract. See: open timbre 
(voce aperta), close timbre (voce chiusa), and whoop timbre.
Active vowel modi/f_ication: a change in the vowel quality accomplished 
by moving the vowel formants from their normal speech locations by 
means of changes in the shape of the vocal tract in an attempt to /f_ind 
better (more resonant) resonance:harmonic matches.
Aﬀect: emotive expression, important for the spontaneous motivation 
and organization of voice and the maintenance of the pharyngeal poise 
necessary for vocal tract stability across range and vowels.
PRAA.indb   153PRAA.indb   153 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
 Deﬁnitions 154
Antinode: see pressure antinode.
Articulation: in speech and singing, the shaping or tuning of the vocal 
tract to modify the /f_iltered voice source signal; articulation also includes 
how the tongue, lips, jaw, and other speech organs are involved in the 
production of speech sounds.
Aryepiglottic exit:  the mouth of the epilarynx, formed by the tissues 
connecting the epiglottis with the arytenoids. A narrowing of the 
aryepiglottic exit is associated with a boost in upper partials from the 
voice source. Along with other perturbations further downstream along 
the vocal tract, it is part of the resonance strategy of the singer’s formant 
cluster in unampli/f_ied Western classical singing and possibly also of the 
ring or twang of belt production.
Auditory roughness:  the psychoacoustic percept of buzziness due to 
closely clustered (usually harmonic) frequencies, that is, frequencies a 
minor third or less apart (harmonics ( 6fo). Auditory roughness migrates 
from rough low to smooth high across range, register, and voice type, 
and is associated with laryngeal registers: rough with “chest voice, ” an 
intermediate sizzle with “mix, ” and smooth with “head voice. ”
Bandwidth: a tube resonance has a certain frequency range contour; that 
is, it will reinforce frequencies on either side of its peak frequency response, 
covering a range of frequencies. If the contour of the resonance is a tall, 
narrow peak, it has a narrow bandwidth with higher potential intensity. 
If its contour is rounder, it has a broad bandwidth  with less potential 
intensity. Brass instrument resonances have very narrow bandwidths and 
will therefore only pass speci/f_ic harmonics of a given tube through but 
with higher intensity. Vocal tract resonances and formants typically have 
wider bandwidths, allowing more voice source harmonics through on 
either side of the peak formant frequency.
Belting: a singing style with a mechanism one dominant laryngeal 
registration, prioritizing the extension of a bright, speech-like timbre 
higher, using an acoustic strategy in which the /f_irst resonance tracks the 
second harmonic; in other words, a kind of skillful yelling or calling. 
Some form of belting is prevalent in many forms of popular, folk, and 
world music and in American musical theater.
PRAA.indb   154PRAA.indb   154 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
Deﬁnitions 155
Belt mix: a delayed (higher) version of close timbre, in which the second 
harmonic of the voice source lies between the /f_irst and second resonances, 
and the second resonance highlights a higher source harmonic, enabling 
the singer to extend a belt-like, bright timbre into the top of the treble clef 
and above.
Breathy phonation: (see Mode of phonation)
Chesty: (see Laryngeal register)
Chiaroscuro: an Italian term meaning “bright-dark” or “clear-dark” 
borrowed from art history to describe an ideal resonance balance between 
low and high-frequency components in Western classical singing. It is 
usually accomplished (in middle and lower ranges) by some balance in 
power between the /f_irst formant and the singer’s formant cluster. Also 
termed chiaroscuro balanced resonance.
Closed Quotient: the average percentage of time the glottis is closed 
during one vibratory cycle. A large closed quotient would usually indicate 
a chestier laryngeal register with a short, thick vocal fold shape (vibrational 
mechanism one). A smaller closed quotient would usually indicate a 
headier laryngeal register with a long, thin vocal fold shape (vibrational 
mechanism two). (See Contact quotient)
Close: as a verb, to close; an acoustic concentration of the sound that occurs 
when a source harmonic, particularly the second harmonic, surpasses the 
/f_irst vocal tract resonance. Also called covering or turning over.
Close timbre: a vocal quality and acoustic register in which the second 
harmonic has risen above the /f_irst resonance peak or /f_irst formant, causing 
the voice to seem to “turn over. ” Also termed voce chiusa in Italian. Belt 
“mix” is a variant of close timbre.
Close vowel: a vowel with a low /f_irst formant, such as [i] and [u], and an 
inherently convergent resonator shape.
Closed phase: the portion of a periodic glottal cycle during which the 
glottis is closed and air&ow is zero.
PRAA.indb   155PRAA.indb   155 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
 Deﬁnitions 156
Contact quotient: the degree of vocal fold tissue in contact in a given 
vibratory cycle. A large contact quotient would usually indicate a chestier 
laryngeal register with a short, thick shape (vibrational mechanism one). 
A smaller contact quotient would usually indicate a headier laryngeal 
register with a long, thin shape (vibrational mechanism two). !ough 
related to closed quotient, it is possible to have a high contact quotient 
without complete glottal closure, or a high closed quotient (duration 
of closure) without deep contact, but it is more typical to have a high 
closed quotient when there is a high contact quotient. EGG displays 
contact quotient reliably, from which closed quotient may be less reliably 
inferred.
Contemporary Commercial Music (CCM): popular music genres other 
than Western classical.
Convergent resonator: a vocal tract shape, which for the vowel being 
produced is relatively more open near the glottis and narrower near the 
lips (like an inverted megaphone). Such a resonance strategy is typical of 
unampli/f_ied Western classical singing and voce chiusa.
Coup de glotte: a clean, gentle glottal onset, in which the vocal folds close 
immediately prior to phonation; the most e#cient, expressive way to 
onset phonation; advocated by Manuel Garcia.
Cover: the timbral shi/f_t corollary to the ascending fR1:2fo crossing, also 
termed “turning over” or “closing, ” and causing a more internal and less 
“exposed” timbral and somatosensory percept.
Cricothyroid muscles (CT): (see Laryngeal register)
Declarative knowledge: the relatively objective, measurable, quantitative 
knowledge of physical realities, such as vocal physiology and acoustics. 
Such knowledge is available to scienti/f_ic investigation and clear, 
straightforward articulation. (see Procedural knowledge.)
Depth: a description of the timbre of a sound that has signi/f_icant strength 
in one of its lowest harmonics, as resonated by the /f_irst resonance and 
featured as the /f_irst formant.
PRAA.indb   156PRAA.indb   156 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
Deﬁnitions 157
Divergent resonator: a description of a resonator shape that is smaller in 
the pharynx and more open nearer the lips. Open vowels are inherently 
divergent in shape. !is resonance strategy is more typical of musical 
theater as well as many world music singing styles.
Downstream resistor: any articulator position or device that resists 
air&ow to some extent that is downstream from the vocal folds, that is, 
nearer to or at the lips. Downstream resistors share the pressure load from 
the lungs with the vocal folds, necessitating higher air&ow through the 
glottis, reducing the transglottal pressure diﬀerence, thus discouraging 
pressed phonation. (See also Semi-occluded vocal tract)
Electroglottography (EGG): a charting of the amount of glottal contact 
in each vibratory cycle, from which a closed quotient (the percentage 
of time the glottis is closed) and laryngeal register can be postulated. 
Data is collected by means of a small electric current passing between 
two electrodes placed one on either side of the larynx. !e greater the 
conductivity between them, the greater the vocal fold contact. Chest 
voice (mechanism one) has greater vocal fold contact and a larger contact 
quotient than head voice (mechanism two).
Epilarynx, epilaryngeal tube: the short tube formed by the epiglottis 
and the aryepiglottic folds and arytenoids just above the vocal 
folds. !e epilarynx forms a small tube within the larger tube of the 
laryngopharynx. Narrowing of the aryepiglottic opening (the exit of the 
epilarynx) increases acoustic reactance and boosts higher frequencies. It 
is surrounded by the piriform sinus spaces and valleculae, both of which 
create anti-resonances.
Fach: a German term for speci/f_ic voice categories, such as soubrette 
soprano, Heldentenor, Verdi baritone, and so on, which are determined 
by the tessitura capacity, vocal “weight, ” and timbre of a voice. !e overall 
location of vocal tract formants, as well as the speci/f_ic location of the 
singer’s formant cluster are signi/f_icant factors in determining quality and 
therefore the Fach of a singer.
Filter function: the characteristic of the vocal tract sound transfer function 
to selectively prefer and pass some frequencies through over others, and 
PRAA.indb   157PRAA.indb   157 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
 Deﬁnitions 158
of the periodic vocal fold oscillation to reinforce those frequencies in sync 
with its periodicity.
First formant: the lowest radiated spectral peak of a voice, typically C4 
or above. Most /f_irst formants lie in contact with the treble clef and cover 
about one octave from the lowest of an [i] to the highest of an [a].
Flow phonation: (see Mode of phonation)
Formant: a frequency peak in the radiated spectrum, caused by a natural 
resonance of the vocal tract, that is, by a standing wave of the quarter-
wave resonator.
Vowel formants: the /f_irst (lowest) two formants are the most easily tunable 
and also span the range of all relevant vowel-like tone colors; therefore, 
they are the most signi/f_icant in de/f_ining the vowel quality of a sound. 
Together they are called the vowel formants.
Singer’s formant cluster (SFC): a clustering of formants three and above 
(usually formants 3–5) generated by a low larynx, open laryngopharynx, 
narrowed epilaryngeal tube exit, and various additional perturbations 
along the vocal tract length, that results in an increase in power in the 
high-frequency components of a sung sound. It is especially characteristic 
of non-treble voices in Western classical singing, enabling them to carry 
over orchestral accompaniment.
Formant detuning: the tuning of a resonance frequency peak away from 
a harmonic to weaken its eﬀect. Used with F2 in the upper range of treble 
voices to reduce shrillness and with F1 in non-treble voices and some 
CCM aesthetics, such as belting, to avoid whoop timbre on close vowels.
Formant tracking: the tuning of a resonance to follow or track a speci/f_ic 
harmonic, such as fR1:1fo tracking of whoop timbre (upper treble voice 
strategy) or fR1:2fo tracking of the yell or belting.
Formant tuning: the tuning of one or both of the /f_irst two resonances in 
order to /f_ind a better resonance:harmonic match and formant radiation 
for more e#cient output.
PRAA.indb   158PRAA.indb   158 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
Deﬁnitions 159
Front-back vowel designation: a description either of a physical 
articulatory characteristic (a fronted tongue dorsum-palatal-narrowing 
versus a tongue hump further back), or of an acoustic characteristic (a 
sound with a high second formant and therefore stronger high partials, 
i.e., a front vowel; or a low second formant and therefore weaker high 
partials and potentially stronger low partials, i.e., a back vowel).
Fullness: a typical descriptor of a sound with signi/f_icant strength in its 
lowest harmonics, as featured by the /f_irst resonance as the /f_irst formant. 
Other similar terms are: depth, warmth, roundness.
Fundamental frequency (1fo): the lowest harmonic of a sound (previously 
H1), more or less equivalent to the perceived pitch.
Harmonic: a frequency component of a periodic sound. Harmonic 
frequency components are either the lowest component (the fundamental 
frequency) or whole integer multiples of the lowest frequency component. 
Together, they generate a pressure waveform that repeats at the frequency 
of that lowest common denominator.
Harmonic to noise ratio (HNR): the percentage of periodic to aperiodic 
spectral content in a sound. A “pure” pitch percept arises from sounds 
that have a high HNR, that is, those that contain only or mostly harmonic 
frequencies. !e lower the HNR, the noisier the sound percept.
Headier: a tone with a steeper spectral slope and smoother timbral 
percept; therefore, associated with “head voice” or mechanism two. (See 
laryngeal register)
Heavy Cover: deliberate lowering of fR1 (by tube lengthening and vowel 
closing) to below 2fo to precipitate the turning over of the voice. Strategies 
used include lowering the larynx, lip rounding and/or trumpeting, and 
vowel darkening.
Helmholtz resonator:  a hollow enclosure having a smaller opening 
consisting of such dimensions that the enclosure resonates at a single 
frequency determined by the relative dimensions of its space and opening: 
the larger the space and smaller the exit, the lower the frequency.
PRAA.indb   159PRAA.indb   159 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
 Deﬁnitions 160
Inertive reactance: a sluggishness of air molecule movement created by 
resonator convergence, which can improve resonator interactivity with the 
vibrator by reducing the transglottal pressure diﬀerence, glottal resistance, 
and phonation threshold pressure.
Intensity: the power of a sound measurable in decibels; the physical 
correlate to perceptual loudness.
Laryngeal register: the muscular adjustment of the vocal folds; the 
relative participation of the thyroarytenoid (TA—shortening, thickening) 
muscles and the cricothyroid (CT—stretching, thinning) muscles.
Chesty: historic description of a sound assumed to be TA dominant, with 
shorter, thicker, looser vocal folds, and which has a shallower spectral 
slope with more strong, high harmonic component frequencies, and a 
buzzier timbre. Now called vibrational mechanism one.
Cricothyroid muscles (CT): the muscles, which upon contracting stretch 
and thin the vocal folds for higher pitches. !ey are mostly situated outside 
of the larynx and tilt the laryngeal cartilages to stretch the vocal folds. !ey 
are responsible for what has historically been called “head” or “falsetto” 
register (now vibrational mechanism two ), with its thinner vocal fold 
contact, fundamental frequency dominance, and smaller number of 
harmonics.
Heady: historic description of a sound assumed to be CT dominant, with 
thinner, longer, tauter vocal folds, and which has a stronger fundamental, 
a steeper spectral slope, fewer and weaker high harmonic component 
frequencies, and a smoother timbre. Now called vibrational mechanism 
two.
/T_hyroarytenoid muscles (TA): the muscles, which upon contracting 
shorten and thicken the vocal folds for lower pitches. !ey comprise the 
body of the vocal folds and are responsible for what has historically been 
called “chest” register (now vibrational mechanism one), with its thicker 
vocal fold contact, vertical phase diﬀerence , and larger number of 
harmonics.
Linear source-/f_ilter model: an earlier model of vocal resonance that was 
sequentially, chronologically linear; that is, that postulated a power source 
(breath) providing air&ow to a vibrator (the vocal folds), bringing them 
into vibration, generating a voice source signal (sound wave) containing 
PRAA.indb   160PRAA.indb   160 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
Deﬁnitions 161
harmonics, which are then selectively resonated by a /f_ilter (resonator; the 
vocal tract), which then transfers the /f_iltered harmonics to the outside 
world through the lips. (See non-linear source-/f_ilter model.)
Locational somatosense: the perceptual location of sensation of a sound; 
historically referred to as “placement. ” Sound sensation migrates across 
range from predominantly oral on low pitches to increasingly internal, 
above the palate, and into the torso with ascent.
Maximum Flow Declination Rate: the rate of reduction of air&ow volume 
of the glottal impulses from peak (maximum) &ow to zero or baseline 
&ow; the more rapid the declination, the stronger the high-frequency 
content of the voice source excitation.
Mechanism one: a vibrational mode of the larynx in which the vocal fold 
shape is short and thick, the vocal fold cover loose, and in which the TA 
muscle is involved in the vibration. It has a vertical phase diﬀerence , 
generating more and stronger high partials. It is caused by greater TA 
laryngeal muscle participation. (See Laryngeal register)
Mechanism three: a vibrational mode of the larynx in which the vocal 
fold shape is long and thin, the vocal fold cover is taut, eventually involving 
epithelial vibration. However, the vocal folds may not be fully adducted 
nor vibrate along their full length.
Mechanism two: a vibrational mode of the larynx in which the vocal 
fold shape is long and thin, the vocal fold cover is taut, involving vocal 
ligament vibration. It has little vertical phase diﬀerence , resulting in 
a more sinusoidal pressure wave that is more fundamental frequency 
dominant. It is caused by greater CT laryngeal muscle participation and 
usually passive TAs. (See Laryngeal register)
Mechanism zero: a vibrational mode of the voice source in which the 
vocal fold shape is short and thick, and the vocalis muscle and vocal fold 
cover are loose. Also called pulse or vocal fry register.
Mode of phonation: a way of categorizing the ratios of the three elements 
of phonation: breath pressure (the transglottal pressure diﬀerence), 
PRAA.indb   161PRAA.indb   161 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
 Deﬁnitions 162
air&ow (through the glottis), and glottal resistance (vocal valve closure 
force). Although these can vary along a continuum, they can be modeled 
by representative numbers in a phonation equation as follows: breath 
pressure/air&ow = glottal resistance. One of three ratios of pressure, &ow, 
and glottal resistance in phonation: breathy (excess air&ow: 1/ 2 = 0.5); 
pressed (excess glottal resistance or glottal closure force: 1/0.5 = 2); &ow 
(a balance between pressure, &ow, and resistance: 1/1 = 1). (Not to be 
confused with vibrational mechanism; see Laryngeal registration above.)
Breathy phonation: a phonation equation model with excess air&ow, such 
as 1/2 = 0.5 would be termed breathy phonation.
Flow phonation: a phonation equation model with an ideal balance for a 
given situation would be 1/1=1, and is termed &ow phonation.
Pressed phonation: a phonation equation model with excess glottal 
resistance, such as 1/0.5 = 2 would be termed pressed phonation.
Narrow frequency bandwidth: see Bandwidth.
Nasalance: using a (usually) slight opening of the velopharyngeal port 
to divert and allow a small percentage of air&ow and sound through 
the nares. Nasalance broadens the bandwidth of the /f_irst resonance, 
weakening its intensity. A broader, weaker fR1 reduces potential interactive 
interference with laryngeal register transitions and the percentage of tone 
color contributed by the /f_irst formant, thus brightening the timbre.
Necessary roughness: a perception of buzziness caused by high, closely 
clustered and resonated spectral content. Frequencies less than a m3 
apart beat against each other to human hearing perception, introducing a 
buzziness or sizzle to the timbral percept.
Node: see pressure node.
Non-linear source-/f_ilter model: a source-/f_ilter model of vocal resonance 
with the added component of possible interactivity between the /f_ilter 
and the source, such that certain resonation postures of the /f_ilter cause 
feedback on the vibrator that alters the function and contribution of the 
vibrator, ideally by assisting its e#ciency.
PRAA.indb   162PRAA.indb   162 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
Deﬁnitions 163
Openness-closeness dimension:  descriptions of a vocal sound relative 
to the frequency location of its /f_irst formant and the relationship of its 
harmonics to its /f_irst formant. (See Voce chiusa, Close timbre, Close vowel, 
and Voce aperta, Open timbre, Open vowel)
Open timbre: a vocal sound in which two or more harmonics are at or 
below the /f_irst formant of the vowel being sung. Also termed voce aperta 
in Italian. Sometimes also used to describe a generally divergent resonance 
shape strategy.
Open vowel: a vowel with a high /f_irst formant, such as [ɑ], and an 
inherently divergent resonator shape.
Overtones: a designation for frequency components of a sound that lie 
above the fundamental frequency. Overtones usually refer to harmonic 
frequencies. !e /f_irst overtone is the second harmonic.
Over-vowel tone color: the vowel-like spectral tone color tuned by the 
second resonance of the vocal tract and featured by the radiated second 
formant. Its pitch ranges from the top of the treble clef to just into the top 
octave of the keyboard. In isolation, it has the spectral tone color range of [~ɔ 
ɑ a æ ɛ ɪ e i]. As such, it is usually the target tone color of the intended vowel.
Partials: another term for frequency components of a sound; partials may 
also refer to non-harmonic frequencies, that is, frequencies that are not 
multiples of the lowest frequency component.
Passaggio: Italian for passage or transition into the upper voice.
Primo passaggio: the lower entry into the transition zone.
Secondo passaggio:  the upper exit of the transition zone, entry into the 
upper voice.
Zona di passaggio: the transition zone, a range segment of about a 4th or 
5th in non-treble voice singers, during which it is thought that the laryngeal 
registration should shi/f_t from a TA dominant mechanism one to a lighter 
mechanism one with greater CT participation. In treble voice registration 
this transition area is longer and is sub-divided into a lower middle and 
upper middle, during which the voice transitions into CT dominant 
vibrational mechanism two.
PRAA.indb   163PRAA.indb   163 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
 Deﬁnitions 164
Passive vowel migration, passive vowel modi/f_ication: this author’s 
proposed designations for a change in vowel quality accomplished 
by retaining the vocal tract shape but moving the pitch with its subset 
of harmonics. !e change in vowel quality results from the changing 
relationships and interactions between the stable resonances and the 
moving harmonics. (See Vowel modi/f_ication.)
Perturbation /T_heory: a theory modeling the vocal tract as a quarter-
wave resonator whose frequency responses (resonances) can be retuned 
by local perturbations (changes of dimension: narrowings or widenings) 
near pressure wave nodes or antinodes.
Pharyngeal voice:  a vocal production typically utilizing the thin vocal 
ligament of mechanism two with enhanced vocal fold closure, pharyngeal 
narrowing, a shallow spectral slope, and a peculiarly bright timbre. Also 
called “witch voice” ( voce di strega ). Used to train the bridge between 
mechanisms one and two and ease of upper voice phonation.
Piriform Sinuses (Fossae): the small side branches of the lower pharynx 
on either side of the laryngopharynx, which create an anti-resonance in 
the 4000–6000 Hz region, highlighting the singer’s formant cluster just 
below (2000–4000 Hz).
Pitch: our perception of the frequency of a sound. It is the frequency of 
the composite pressure pattern of multiple harmonic frequencies of a 
tone. !ough derived from processing the /f_irst /f_ive to eight harmonics 
of a tone, in most practical circumstances, it can be considered to be the 
psychoacoustic equivalent of the fundamental frequency.
Pitch of turning: the pitch at which a voice turns over, just inside of an 
octave below the pitch of the /f_irst formant of the vowel being sung. !e 
pitch at which the 2fo crosses above the fR1 of the vowel being sung.
Power spectrum: an analysis of sound that displays power on the vertical 
axis and frequency components on the horizontal axis.
Pressed phonation: (see Mode of phonation)
PRAA.indb   164PRAA.indb   164 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
Deﬁnitions 165
Pressure antinode:  a point of maximum pressure variation within an 
average pressure level context.
Pressure node: a point of minimum pressure variation within an average 
pressure level context.
Pressure waveform: the pattern of air pressure variations (compressions 
and rarefactions) that form a sound. If there is a regular, periodically 
repeating pattern, the sound will have a clear pitch. If there is no regularly 
repeating pattern, but rather random pressure variations, the sound will 
be perceived as noise.
Primary acoustic register transitions: prominent acoustic registration 
events at the point at which 2fo crosses fR1, transitioning from open to close 
timbre, and the point at which 1 fo intersects fR1, attaining whoop timbre. 
Re/f_ining these two events is a major goal of Western classical singing 
pedagogy for non-treble and treble voices, respectively. !e former is 
most o/f_ten associated with the turning over of the open vowels in the 
neighborhood of C4-G4 in non-treble voices. !e latter is the preferred 
strategy for the upper middle range of Western classical treble voices.
Primary laryngeal register transition: the shi/f_t from chest to falsetto, 
or vibrational mechanism one to vibrational mechanism two. Non-
treble classical singers tend to avoid this shi/f_t, staying in some form 
of mechanism one for the entire range. Treble classical singers tend to 
shi/f_t from mechanism one to mechanism two between C4 and G4, 
usually before or by the fR1:2fo acoustic register transition. Belters extend 
mechanism one or chest register to ca. C5.
Primo passaggio: see passaggio.
Procedural knowledge: the subjective, sensorial knowledge of motor 
behavior, what it feels like to do the thing; the goal of motor learning for 
skillful function; in short, the automated basis of ability. Being subjective 
and sensorial, procedural knowledge is challenging to articulate but is 
essential for intentional, skillful physical activity of any kind.
PRAA.indb   165PRAA.indb   165 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
 Deﬁnitions 166
Quarter-wave resonator: a resonator that is a tube open at one end 
and closed at the other. Such a resonator can establish standing waves 
(resonances) at the quarter-wavelength and odd-numbered multiples of 
that length: 3/4 wavelength, 5/4 wavelength, 7/4 wavelength, and so on, 
that is, wavelength segments with nodes and antinodes at opposite ends of 
the tubular resonator. !e vocal tract is a form of quarter-wave resonator, 
but with more variable, tunable wavelengths.
Reactance: a matching of resistance between the glottis and the vocal 
tract or epilarynx that increases the interactivity of the system (feedback 
on the vibrator).
Resonator convergence: an overall downstream narrowing of the vocal 
tract shape from a relatively open area near the glottis to a narrowing 
nearer the lips.
Resonance: Resonance is the tendency of an object or system to respond 
(oscillate) more strongly and longer to particular frequencies introduced 
into it. A vocal tract resonance is one of several potential peak frequency 
responses of the vocal tract to acoustic input.
Real-time spectrography: an ever-changing, immediately current 
analysis and visual representation of sound that displays frequency on the 
vertical, time on the horizontal, and intensity on the gray or color scale. 
!is form of sound display is currently the most intuitive and informative 
as a visual learning aid for students.
Roll-oﬀ: the drop in intensity of harmonics above the /f_irst harmonic; 
typically indicated in decibels per octave (dBs/octave). Called “Tilt” on 
the Madde synthesizer. Also termed spectral slope.
Secondo passaggio: see passaggio.
Semi-occluded vocal tract (SOVT):  a vocal tract with a location or exit 
su#ciently narrowed to generate &ow resistance or acoustic impedance. 
A short thin straw is one mechanical example. A very small, kazoo-like 
[w] is an articulatory example. (See also downstream resistor.) SOVT 
exercises are used to rebalance pressure, &ow, and resistance levels, 
reducing transglottal pressure diﬀerence and glottal resistance.
PRAA.indb   166PRAA.indb   166 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
Deﬁnitions 167
Singer’s formant cluster: (see Formant)
Somatosense: the body’s perceptual feel of a phenomenon or behavior, 
such as the somatosense of a sung sound.
Spectral envelope: an outline of the power dimension of a power spectrum. 
It is useful for revealing the resonance characteristics (formants) of a 
particular vocal tract shape.
Spectral slope: the rate at which higher frequency spectral content of the 
voice source or the radiated sound weakens in intensity per octave.
Spectral tilt: another name for spectral slope.
Spectrum: a chart of the frequency content of a sound, usually with 
frequency on the horizontal axis and intensity on the vertical axis.
Spectrography: a spectrograph displays frequency on the vertical axis, 
time on the horizontal axis, and power on a gray or color scale. It is 
perhaps the most accessible display of sound for studio use.
/T_hyroarytenoid muscles (TA): (see Laryngeal register)
Transfer function of the vocal tract:  the capacity of a particular shape 
of the vocal tract to transfer sound energy from the glottis to the outside 
world, which capacity varies preferentially by frequency, resulting in 
“peaks and valleys” of frequency response.
Transglottal pressure diﬀerence: the diﬀerence in pressure between the 
average subglottal (tracheal) and supraglottal air pressures. !e transglottal 
pressure diﬀerence determines the necessary glottal resistance level and 
resultant vocal fold collision force. A comfortably low transglottal pressure 
diﬀerence is therefore essential to maintaining healthy vocal fold tissue.
Transient model of voice acoustics: a time and pressure dominant model 
of voice acoustics in contrast to the frequency-dominant source-/f_ilter 
model. !e transient model more accurately portrays the way in which 
the complex pressure waves of voice are actually generated.
PRAA.indb   167PRAA.indb   167 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
 Deﬁnitions 168
Turning over: a term descriptive of the passing of 2fo above fR1 of a vowel 
when ascending, and its accompanying sound and somatosense.
Twang: a (controverted) term descriptive of a bright, edgy quality used in 
CCM genres, accomplished by various pharyngeal narrowing strategies. 
Associated by some more with Country Music vocal style, but used in 
music theater belt and other styles as well.
Under-vowel tone color: the vowel-like spectral tone color tuned by the 
/f_irst resonance of the vocal tract and featured by the /f_irst formant. Its pitch 
range largely overlaps the treble clef, and therefore in isolation has the 
spectral tone color range of [~o-u] but in context is usually perceived as 
mixed with the tone color of the second formant over-vowel.
Valleculae: spaces between the epilarynx and the back of the tongue. Like 
the piriform sinuses behind the epilarynx, open valleculae create a high-
frequency anti-resonance. Hence, closing them increases timbal ring.
Valsalva maneuver:  a forceful compression of the thorax (ribcage), 
similar to eﬀortful elimination, childbearing, and heavy li/f_ting. If resisted 
by glottal closure, it stimulates excessively strong glottal resistance and 
should not be used in singing.
Vertical phase diﬀerence : a diﬀerence in the timing of opening and 
closing of the vocal folds’ vertical contact. It is caused by thicker vocal 
folds whose contact area opens and closes at its lower margins ahead of 
the opening and closing of its upper margins.
Vocal ligament: the intermediate layer of the three-layer vocal fold 
structure: the epithelial mucosal cover, the vocal ligament, and the vocalis 
(thyroarytenoid) muscle body. Vocal fold vibrational load shi/f_ts from the 
full body in mechanism one to the vocal ligament in mechanism two to 
the epithelial layer in mechanism three.
Vocal tract /f_ilter: the tube resonator comprised of the vocal tract from the 
glottis to the lips. !is resonator “/f_ilters” spectral partials passing through 
it, strengthening some and weakening others to create the vowels and 
timbre of the sound radiated from the lips.
PRAA.indb   168PRAA.indb   168 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
Deﬁnitions 169
Vocal tract resonances: potential peak frequency responses of the vocal 
tract /f_ilter function to acoustic input.
Voce aperta: open timbre; any sung sounds in which two or more 
harmonics are at or below the /f_irst resonance//f_irst formant—in other 
words, the timbre of any pitches sung an octave or more below the /f_irst 
formant of the vowel being sung. !is term has also been used historically 
to describe an overall divergent resonator shape characterized by a timbre 
in which vowels can tend to widen and move into yell timbre.
Voce chiusa: close timbre; any sung sounds in which the second harmonic 
is above the /f_irst resonance//f_irst formant—in other words, the timbre of 
any sung pitches less than an octave below the /f_irst formant. !is term 
has also been used historically to describe an overall convergent resonator 
poise that results in the chiaroscuro timbre of Western classical singing, in 
which vowels close when and where they should relative to vowels’ /f_irst 
resonance/formant locations, in contrast to a predominantly divergent, 
open timbre resonator adjustment.
Voice source: the sound signal produced by the excitation of the air 
column in the vocal tract by the abrupt closure of the glottic valve (vocal 
folds). Each such closure introduces a noise spectrum with a theoretically 
in/f_inite number of frequencies that excite the transfer function of the 
vocal tract. !us, both the vocal tract and the vocal folds cooperate in 
generating the voice source of a single impulse, which is then /f_iltered 
further—by the periodic reiteration of that pulse—for frequencies in sync 
with its fundamental frequency, that is, harmonic frequencies.
Vowel designations: close or open (due to low or high /f_irst formant 
locations), front or back (due to high or low second formant locations) 
categorizations.
Vowel formants: (see Formant)
Vowel integrity: maintaining acceptable vowel identity even when vowel 
modi/f_ication is necessary; avoidance of vowel distortion.
PRAA.indb   169PRAA.indb   169 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
 Deﬁnitions 170
Vowel migration: the inevitable, gradual migration or change of timbre 
of vowels across range, due to frequency-dependent spectral tone color 
and the changing interactions of frequencies with vocal tract resonances.
Vowel modi/f_ication: historically understood to refer to a change in the 
vowel quality accomplished by moving the vowel formants from their 
normal speech locations by means of changes in the shape of the vocal 
tract in an attempt to /f_ind better (more resonant) resonance:harmonic 
matches. !is text proposes the subcategories: active and passive vowel 
modi/f_ication. (See Passive vowel modi/f_ication)
Whoop timbre: the timbre of a sung sound that is dominated by the tone 
color of its fundamental frequency. Whoop timbre occurs when the sung 
pitch approximately matches (and is tracked by) the frequency of the 
/f_irst resonance and is therefore prominently featured in the radiated /f_irst 
formant: a fR1:1fo coupling. It begins to appear from the mid-treble clef, 
especially in treble voices. Since the fundamental frequency in that range 
has an [~u], [~o], or [~ɔ]-like tone color, whoop timbre is round, domed, 
and “whoop” or “hoot” like and is associated with head voice or M2.
Y ell coupling, yell timbre: an acoustic coupling of fR1 and 2fo that has been 
carried higher than normal through tube shortening and mouth widening 
(fR1:2fo tracking); bright and o/f_ten pressed and spread in quality.
Zona di passaggio: transition zone. (See passaggio)
PRAA.indb   170PRAA.indb   170 7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM7/10/2025   4:39:00 PM
Abbreviations
Abbreviations
A4, B3, C5, etc.: pitch designations by octave with A4 corresponding to 
440 Hz and C4 corresponding to middle C.
CCM: Contemporary Commercial Music; designation of vocal styles 
other than Western classical, o/f_ten electronically ampli/f_ied.
CT: Cricothyroid muscle
fo, 1 fo: the fundamental frequency or lowest frequency component of a 
periodic sound (the same as H1).
F1, F2, F3, etc.: formants resulting from the vocal tract /f_ilter function. !e 
vocal tract is a resonator with multiple natural resonances, resulting in 
radiated spectral peaks called formants that are numbered from lowest to 
highest. 
1fo, 2 fo, 3 fo, etc.: harmonic frequency components of a periodic sound 
having “pitch”: “one times the fundamental oscillation; two times the 
fundamental frequency oscillation, ” and so on; more simply stated, /f_irst 
harmonic, second harmonic, third harmonic, and so on. Formerly labeled 
H1, H2, H3, and so on.
IP A: International Phonetic Alphabet. IPA symbols for vowels appear in 
the following form in this text: [ɑ].
M0, M1, M2, M3: vibrational mechanisms of the vocal folds, corresponding 
roughly to the historic terms pulse, chest, head, and whistle.
SFC: Singer’s formant cluster, a clustering of formants three and 
higher.
TA: !yroarytenoid muscle
PRAA.indb   171PRAA.indb   171 7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM
Appendix 1
Appendix 1
Madde Explorations
Madde Exploration 1: 
The Unresonated Voice Source
Check the “Show formants/partials” box (bottom right just above the 
keyboard). Uncheck the formants boxes (upper le/f_t, labeled F1[Hz], 
F2[Hz], F3[Hz], etc.). Activate a set of harmonics by clicking on a pitch 
on the keyboard at or below middle C (middle C4 is marked with a black 
dot). Y ou will see a set of numbered lines, representing the harmonics 
of the pitch you selected, just above the keyboard. (See Figure 18.1 .) 
Activate the play arrow (top le/f_t). !is will approximate the pitched buzz 
of an unresonated set of harmonics as it might sound if exposed in open 
space. Y ou will probably want to deactivate this unattractive sound fairly 
quickly.
Madde Exploration 2: The E/uniFB00ect of 
Mode of Phonation and Range on 
Source Harmonics
Deactivate the formant boxes as you did for Madde Example 1. To 
experience the eﬀect of laryngeal register on the voice source, adjust the 
Tilt [dB/oct] level in the Source spectrum area (upper right) by clicking 
in the tilt box and using the up and down arrows on your keyboard. !e 
Tilt represents the roll-oﬀ in power per octave of the harmonics. !e 
larger the negative number, the greater the tilt. !e default Tilt is set for 
Appendix 1
PRAA.indb   172PRAA.indb   172 7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM
 Appendix 1 173
Appendix 1
a roll-oﬀ of 6 decibels per octave (i.e., -6). A “headier” tone would have a 
steeper roll-oﬀ (try -12). A pressed tone would have a shallower roll-oﬀ  
(try -3). (!is author advises against trying positive tilt numbers, at least 
not with formants deactivated.) ( Figure 18.2) 
Activate the play arrow (top le/f_t) for each of these. !e steeper the tilt 
or roll-oﬀ, the milder the source will sound since it will have weaker high 
harmonics. Since these higher frequencies are precisely where our ears are 
the most sensitive to intensity, the signal will also sound quieter at steeper 
tilts (-12), and louder (and more annoying!) at shallower tilts (-3). Y ou 
will again want to deactivate the sound.
In order to see the eﬀect of pitch on the number of available harmonics, 
click on successively higher pitches up to soprano high C (C6). !e Madde 
keyboard will only show three harmonics at that pitch, since the top C 
(C8) is missing from its keyboard display. It is dramatically clear that high 
sopranos face a rather diﬀerent resonance challenge/situation than a non-
treble voice faces.
Figure 18.1 Madde voice synthesizer, with vocal tract formants unchecked, 
showing and playing an unresonated harmonic frequency set.
PRAA.indb   173PRAA.indb   173 7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM
Appendix 1  174
Madde Exploration 3: Formant 
Resonation of Source Harmonics; 
Harmonic:formant Crossings
Make sure the “Show formants/partials” box (bottom right just above 
the keyboard) is checked. Check the formants boxes (upper le/f_t, labeled 
F1[Hz], F2[Hz], F3[Hz], etc.). Y ou will notice a red band appearing for 
each formant just above its frequency center on the keyboard. Y ou can set 
the formant frequencies for various voice types and vowels. For example, 
bass baritone formants for an [e] vowel might be set as follows: F1 440; F2 
1400; F3 2200; F4 2500; F5 2800. Set those and play the scale C3 D3 E3 F3 
G3. If you continue playing, you may notice timbral changes as harmonics 
pass through formants (visible just above the keyboard), especially through 
formant one (more on that later). Y ou will certainly notice that harmonics, 
once resonated by the vocal tract, are rather more pleasant than with the 
formants removed. Other vowels can be modeled by varying the frequencies 
of the /f_irst two formants (more on that later).
Figure 18.2 Madde voice synthesizer Tilt function (in the Source spectrum 
box, upper right-hand side): Tilt reﬂects source roll-off. Steeper tilt or 
roll-off (a higher negative value) models a headier laryngeal registration. 
Shallower tilt or roll-off (a small negative value) models a chestier laryngeal 
registration.
PRAA.indb   174PRAA.indb   174 7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM7/10/2025   4:39:01 PM
 Appendix 1 175
Madde Exploration 4: Open and 
Close Timbre
Make sure the “Show formants/partials” box (bottom right just above the 
keyboard) is activated. Use the bass baritone formant settings for an [e] 
vowel of Exploration 3, Figure 18.3. !e /f_irst formant for this example 
is set at A440. Try the following explorations: Play pitches that lie more 
than an octave below F1 to experience open timbre. Play an ascending 
scale starting on C3 an octave below middle C. Y ou may notice a timbral 
“closure” when 3fo rises through F1, that is, from ca. C3 to E3, and even 
more prominently when 2fo rises through F1, from G3 to B3, the primary 
turning of the voice (Figure 18.4). 
Madde Exploration 5: Whoop 
Timbre and Beyond
Make sure the “Show formants/partials” box (bottom right just above the 
keyboard) is activated. Use the bass baritone formant settings for an [e] 
Figure 18.3 Formants of the vocal tract set for an [e] in a bass voice.
PRAA.indb   175PRAA.indb   175 7/10/2025   4:39:02 PM7/10/2025   4:39:02 PM
Appendix 1  176
vowel as in Example 3, 4 above. !e /f_irst formant for this example is set at 
A440. Continue with the following explorations:
 1. Ascend stepwise from C4 without adjusting the formants. !e 
implication of leaving the formants the same is that the “singer” 
is not changing his vocal tract (throat/vowel) shape at all. As 
1fo approaches F1, the timbre will become increasingly close 
until full whoop timbre is achieved at the F1:1fo juncture at A4. 
Notice that this rather falsetto/feminine timbre was achieved 
with no adjustment to the Source spectrum Tilt, therefore no 
source change, rather was accomplished entirely by changing 
harmonic:/f_ilter interactions, that is, entirely through changes 
in resonance. !e implication is that source changes (laryngeal 
registration changes) are not necessarily required for this timbre. 
It must be noted, however, that in a human subject, source changes 
are likely to accompany these resonance changes.
 2. If you continue to raise 1 fo above F1 (A4), what is now a counter 
tenor “whoop” timbre will quickly thin, demonstrating the 
necessity of formant tracking above this point.
Figure 18.4 An exploration of turning over, the primary acoustic register 
transition of a voice, when 2fo rises above F1.
PRAA.indb   176PRAA.indb   176 7/10/2025   4:39:02 PM7/10/2025   4:39:02 PM
 Appendix 1 177
 3. Have the synthesizer “sing” D5. Click on the F1[Hz] box. 
Repeatedly click the up arrow on your computer keyboard, 
gradually raising the F1 frequency until it matches D5 (until the 
red F1 band joins 1fo on the pitch D5). Y ou will notice that timbral 
fullness/depth will return.
 4. Click the keyboard down arrow to return F1 to A440 and deactivate 
the sound (Figure 18.5). 
Further Madde Explorations
Modeling Exercises and Vocalizes
Any of the exercises listed above (see Exploring Vowel Turning, p. 125 
and Exploring F1:1fo Transition and Tracking, p. 131) can be modeled on 
Madde to demonstrate an approximation of the passive vowel migrations 
that accompany the primary F1:2fo crossing, or any secondary crossings 
(F1:3fo, F1:4fo, etc.) and the timbral fullness of F1:1fo tracking.
Figure 18.5 1fo rising above F1 will cause thinness of timbre.
PRAA.indb   177PRAA.indb   177 7/10/2025   4:39:02 PM7/10/2025   4:39:02 PM
Appendix 1  178
F1/F2 Map
Vowels can be more &uidly modeled and changed by selecting “Show 
F1/F2 map” under the Settings menu. A chart will display with F1 on the 
horizontal dimension and F2 on the vertical. Clicking and dragging the 
cursor on this map will manipulate F1 and F2 locations, even while the 
“voice” is activated. !is capability will allow exploration not only of 
vowels, but also of opening and closing vowels by modifying a vowel to 
move its /f_irst formant across the 2fo of the pitch being “sung. ” (Figure 18.6) 
Modeling Student Voices
If a student’s formants (from a comfortable part of the range) are derived, 
perhaps by using VoceVista, the student’s voice can be modeled in Madde 
for further exploration. For example, the passive vowel modi/f_ications of 
a non-treble singer’s primary register transition on various vowels can 
be modeled. While it is not usually necessary to model a speci/f_ic voice 
to begin to understand passive modi/f_ication, it may be helpful for some. 
More o/f_ten a generic model of the same voice type will su#ce. Also, fR1:1fo 
tracking of treble voices can be convincingly demonstrated, and their 
resultant necessary active vowel modi/f_ications.
Figure 18.6 F1/F2 map (Vowel Formant Map).
PRAA.indb   178PRAA.indb   178 7/10/2025   4:39:03 PM7/10/2025   4:39:03 PM
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Approximate F1 
Locations by Voice
Why Approximate First Formant 
Locations?
!e chart on the following page gives approximate /f_irst formant locations 
by general voice type. !e formant boxes are deliberately non-speci/f_ic 
(covering more than one pitch) for several reasons: general voice types 
have varieties of subdivisions that accommodate some variety of vocal 
tract length, which overlap with adjacent voice types and subdivisions. 
For example, a high lyric baritone may have formants that are higher than 
those of a Heldentenor, or a deeper mezzo-soprano may have formants 
that are lower than those of a leggiero tenor. Voices are individual, as are 
their formant locations. However, /f_irst formant locations will not vary 
very far from the approximate locations given, and the general contour of 
formant locations from vowel to vowel will be relatively stable. One could 
use VoceVista to identify speci/f_ic spoken formants or formants of vowels 
sung near speech range if speci/f_icity is desired. However, the teacher’s 
ear and the ease and e#ciency of vocal function are usually su#cient for 
re/f_ining the locations of acoustic registration events. Once a teacher knows 
approximate locations by voice type, the passive vowel modi/f_ications that 
accompany these events, and strategies to encourage timbral consistency 
(i.e., tube stability) across these events, the student’s vocal function will 
guide further adjustments.
PRAA.indb   179PRAA.indb   179 7/10/2025   4:39:03 PM7/10/2025   4:39:03 PM
Appendix 2  180
Appendix 2
Approximate F1 Locations by Voice
See www .kenbozeman .com
or https://faculty .lawrence .edu /bozemank /664 -2/ 
Figure 19.1 Approximate ﬁrst formant locations. 
PRAA.indb   180PRAA.indb   180 7/10/2025   4:39:03 PM7/10/2025   4:39:03 PM
Appendix 3
Appendix 3
Events Surrounding 
the Lower Passaggio
See www .kenbozeman .com or
https://faculty .lawrence .edu /bozemank /644 -2/ 
Figure 20.1 Acoustic events surrounding the lower passagio. 
PRAA.indb   181PRAA.indb   181 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
Appendix 4
Appendix 4
Recorded Exercise Examples
http://www .kenbozeman .com /appendix -4-- -video -contents .php
!ese sample explorations were made in the year of the /f_irst edition 
publication with available undergraduate students at various levels 
of development. While they model the acoustic phenomena being 
discussed reasonably well, neither they nor the author would claim that 
they represent singers whose training was completed. !e author is very 
grateful for their willingness to serve as models for educational purposes.
Exploring Vowel Turning (see Chapter 14, p. 125)
Example 1. Leaps across the turn
Example 2. Leaping and stepping across the turn 
Example 3. Levels of turning
Example 4. Repeated note from close to open to close
Example 5. Same vowel across multiple levels
Example 6. Turning with agility
Example 7. Descending and ascending through the turn
Example 8. Ascending and descending through the turn
Exploring fR1:1fo Transition and Tracking (see Chapter 14, p. 131)
Example 9. Repeated note
Example 10. Leap up to open vowel, repeated to close vowel
Example 11. Leap up on same vowel
Example 12. Stepwise Ascent and Descent
PRAA.indb   182PRAA.indb   182 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
Appendix 5
Appendix 5
YouTube Examples
(Available at: http://www .kenbozeman .com)
!ere is inherent risk in citing Y ouTube examples, including the potential 
instability of the cited locations. At the time of this printing, these cited 
locations had been stably available for a number of years. !eir educational 
value overruled the author’s concerns about their potential instability. 
Most of the recordings cited can also be found in other formats. (Y ouTube 
titles in bold.)
Example 1: Leontyne Price “Beim Schlafengehen” Strauss’ Vier Letzte 
Lieder
https://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =ItAmRzPTEdY &t =590s
Example 2: Nicolai Gedda canta Rachmaninov II
http://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =AFa9hgb0tmI &t =2m50s
Example 3: José Van Dam sings Kaddish by Ravel
http://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =IAiWPrhxlpc &t =3m45s
Example 4: Jussi Björling, Ah, Love But A Day
Piano version: https://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =WCElu55 _Efc
Orchestral version: Jussi Björling sings “ Ah Love, but a day”
http://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =4TWoHdA085g &t =0m23s
Example 5: Jussi Björling—“Ombra mai fu”—Atlanta 1959
https://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =pyHaucoWd4Q &t =112s
Example 6: George London sings Schubert—“ An die Musik”
https://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =YUxZlDekIk4
PRAA.indb   183PRAA.indb   183 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
Appendix 5  184
Appendix 5
Example 7: Pavarotti about covered sound
https://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =3JIVs9FZ8sQ
Example 8: How to sing bel canto 2/2 (see 0:30–1:15):
http://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =XPplK22nSXY &t =0m30s
Example 9: How to sing bel canto 1/2 (see 3:14–3:55):
https://www .youtube .com /watch ?v =3nH54BdqWpg &t =194s
Example 10: Rockwell Blake describes dark timbre and
passaggio ./f_l v
(Unfortunately, Example 10 is no longer available)
PRAA.indb   184PRAA.indb   184 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
Selected References
Selected References
Austin, Stephen F . 2005. “!e Voce Chiusa. ” Journal of Singing, 61 (4): 421–5.
Ballantyne, Chadley, and Melissa Malde. 2025. “Sensation, Kinesthesia, Body 
Mapping and Teaching Singing. ” In Graham F . Welch, David M. Howard, 
and John Nix (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Singing, Second ed. New Y ork: 
Oxford University Press.
Bourne, T., M. Garnier, and D. Kenny. 2011. “Music !eater Voice: 
Production, Physiology and Pedagogy. ” Journal of Singing, 67 (4): 237–44.
Bozeman, Kenneth. 2007. “ A Case for Voice Science in the Voice Studio. ” 
Journal of Singing, 63 (3): 265–70.
Bozeman, Kenneth. 2008. “On the Voice: Registration Strategies for Training 
the Male Passaggio. ” Choral Journal, 48: 59–72.
Bozeman, Kenneth. 2010. “!e Role of the First Formant in Training the 
Male Singing Voice. ” Journal of Singing, 66 (3): 291–7.
Bozeman, Kenneth. 2012a. “ Acoustic Passaggio Pedagogy for the Male 
Voice. ” Logopedics Phoniatrics Vocology, 38 (2): 64–9
Bozeman, Kenneth. 2012b. “New Technology for Teaching Voice Science 
and Pedagogy: !e Madde Synthesizer (Svante Granqvist). ” Journal of 
Singing, 68 (4): 415–18.
Bozeman, Kenneth. 2021. Kinesthetic Voice Pedagogy2: Motivating Acoustic 
E#ciency. Gahanna, Ohio: Insideview Press.
Delvaux, Bertrand, and David Howard. 2014. “ A New Method to Explore 
the Spectral Impact of the Piriform Fossae on the Singing Voice: 
Benchmarking Using MRI-Based 3D-Printed Vocal Tracts. ” PLoS ONE, 9 
(7): e102680. https://doi .org /10 .1371 /journal .pone .0102680.
Herbst, Christian T., and Jan G. ,vec. 2014. “ Adjustment of Glottal 
Con/f_igurations in Singing. ” Journal of Singing, 70 (3): 301–8.
Herbst, Christian T., David Howard, and Jan G. ,vec. 2015. “!e Sound 
Source in Singing—Basic Principles and Muscular Adjustments for Fine-
Tuning Vocal Timbre. ” In D. Howard, J. Nix, and G. Welch (eds.), !e 
Oxford Handbook of Singing. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Howell, Ian. 2016. “Parsing the Spectral Envelope: Toward a General !eory 
of Vocal Tone Color. ” DMA thesis, New England Conservatory of Music. 
Retrieved from https://www .academia .edu /29162454.
PRAA.indb   185PRAA.indb   185 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
Selected References  186
Selected References
Howell, Ian. 2017. “Necessary Roughness in the Voice Pedagogy 
Classroom: !e Special Psychoacoustics of the Singing Voice. ” 
VOICEPrints, !e Journal of the New York Singing Teachers’ Association, 
14 (5): 4–7.
Howell, Ian. 2025. Hearing Singing: A Guide to Functional Listening and Voice 
Perception. Lanham: Rowman & Little/f_ield.
Ladefoged, Peter. 1962. Elements of Acoustic Ponetics. Chicago, Il: University 
of Chicago Press.
Lovetri, Jeanette. 2012. “!e Confusion about Belting: A Personal 
Observation. ” VoicePrints: Journal of the New York Singing Teachers’ 
Association (September–October): 4–7.
McCoy, Scott. 2012. Your Voice, An Inside View. Princeton, NJ: Inside View 
Press.
McKinney, James. 1982. !e Diagnosis and Correction of Vocal Faults. San 
Diego, CA: Singular Press.
Miller, Donald G. 2000. Registers of the Singing Voice. Groningen: Groningen 
Press.
Miller, Donald G. 2008. Resonance in Singing. Princeton, NJ: Inside View 
Press.
Miller, Richard. 1986. !e Structure of Singing: System and Art in Vocal 
Technique. New Y ork: Schirmer Books.
Nair, Garyth. 1999. Voice—Tradition and Technology. San Diego, CA: 
Singular Publishing Group.
Nair, Garyth. 2007. !e Cra/f_t of Singing. San Diego, CA: Plural Publishing.
Obert, Kerrie, and Chadley Ballantyne, interview by Kari Ragan. 2019. 
“Getting the Twang of It. ” NATS Chat, January 13. https:// .youtube .com /
watch ?v =KHjbqUYrb04.
Perna, Nicholas. 2015. “Nasality: Do Y ou Hear What I See?” VOICEPrints, 
12 (1): 6–7.
Perna, Nicholas. 2020. “Nasality Deconstructed. ” Journal of Singing, 76 (4): 
429–32.
Schutte, Harm K., and Donald, G. Miller. 1993. “Belting and Pop, 
Nonclassical Approaches to Female Middle Voice: Some Preliminary 
Considerations. ” Journal of Voice, 7 (2): 142–50.
Schutte, Harm K., and Donald, G Miller. 2005. “Mixing Registers: Glottal 
Source or Vocal Tract. ” Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 57: 278–91.
Schutte, Harm K., and Donald, G. Miller. 1993. “Physical De/f_inition of the 
Flageolet Register. ” Journal of Voice, 7 (3): 206–12.
Schutte, Harm K., and Donald, G. Miller. 2005. “Resonance Strategies 
Revealed in Recorded Tenor High Notes. ” Folia Phoniatrica et 
Logopaedica, 57: 292–307.
PRAA.indb   186PRAA.indb   186 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
 Selected References 187
Schutte, Harm K., Donald, G. Miller, and Jan G. ,vec. 1995. “Measurement 
of Formant Frequencies and Bandwidths in Singing. ” Journal of Voice, 9 
(3): 290–6.
Steinhauer, Kimberly M., and Jo Estill. 2008. “!e Estill Voice Model: 
Physiology of Emotion. ” In Voice and Emotion, Vol. 2, 83–99. San Diego: 
Plural Publishing.
Story, Brad. 2016. “!e Vocal Tract in Singing. ” In G. Welch, D. M. Howard, 
& J. Nix (eds.), !e Oxford Handbook of Singing. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. https://doi .org /10 .1093 /oxfordhb /9780199660773 .013 
.012.
Sundberg, Johan. 2001a. “ Articulatory Interpretation of the Singing 
Formants. ” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 55: 838–44.
Sundberg, Johan. 2001b. “Level and Center Frequency of the Singer’s 
Formant. ” Journal of Voice, 15 (2): 176–86.
Sundberg, Johan. 1987. !e Science of the Singing Voice. Imprint DeKalb, Ill.: 
Northern Illinois University Press.
Sundberg, Johan. 1974. “ Articulatory Interpretation of the Singing 
Formants. ”Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 55: 838–44.
Sundberg, Johan. Miriam Havel, M. B. Lã Filipa, Brian P . Gill, and Jessica Lee. 
2016. “Nasal Resonance and Singing. ” Paper presented at the 45th Annual 
Symposium: Care of the Professional Voice, Philadelphia, PA, June, 2.
Titze, Ingo. 1994. Principles of Voice Production. Englewood Cliﬀs, N.J.: 
Prentice Hall.
Titze, Ingo, and Brad Story. 1997. “ Acoustic Interactions of the Voice Source 
with the Lower Vocal Tract. ” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 
101 (4): 2234–43.
Titze, Ingo, and Katherine Verdolini Abbott. 2012. Vocology: !e Science and 
Practice of Voice Habilitation, Salt Lake City, Utah: !e National Center 
for Voice & Speech.
Titze, Ingo, et al. 2015. “Toward a Consensus on Symbolic Notation of 
Harmonics, Resonances, and Formants in Vocalization. ” !e Journal of 
the Acoustical Society of America, 137 (5): 3005–7.
Titze, Ingo, and T. Riede. in press 2025. “ A Proposal for Epithelial 
Dominance in Extremely High Fundamental Frequency Vocalizations. ” 
!e Journal of the Acoustical Society of America.
PRAA.indb   187PRAA.indb   187 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
Index
absolute spectral tone color 6, 16–18, 
30–6, 47, 62, 68, 70–2, 76, 97, 
104, 109, 111, 126, 129, 135, 
144, 153 
acoustic(s) 1, 7, 93, 107, 167 
belting, of 38, 44–5, 107–8, 
110–13, 122–3, 154 
coupling 45–8, 153, 170 
feedback 35, 56, 67, 72, 83, 104, 
131–2, 162, 166 
pedagogy 93 
register 26, 44, 49, 65, 93, 119, 
153, 155, 165 
registration 34, 41 n.3, 47, 75–7, 
94, 153, 165, 179 
sensation 61, 82–3, 104, 138 
strategy 107, 111, 122–3 
tube acoustics 93, 125 
voice acoustics 7, 167 
aﬀect 19, 43, 61, 68, 74, 99, 101, 103, 
109, 112, 117, 126, 138–40, 
143, 153 
Appleman, Ralph 73 
articulation 31, 101–2, 105, 132, 142, 
154 
aryepiglottic sphincter 38, 111, 154, 
157 
auditory roughness 15–16, 18, 70, 
109, 111, 120, 122, 126, 154 
balanced resonance 35, 37–8, 67, 73, 
155 
bandwidth(s) 27, 43–4, 54–5, 62, 148, 
154, 162 
broad 148, 154 
clustered 62 
narrow 154 
Beach, Amy 85–7 
belting 38, 44–5, 107–13, 122–3, 154, 
158 
Blake, Rockwell 116, 184 
breathy phonation 14, 155, 162 
chest 4, 15, 46, 49, 109–10, 112, 
119–21, 138, 165, 171 
chest voice 4, 60, 150, 154 
chest mix 96, 122 
chest register 46, 108, 165 
chesty, chestier 15, 18, 53, 67, 
155–6, 160 
chiaroscuro 35, 38, 40, 46, 57 n.1, 
67–9, 73–4, 155 
close timbre 44, 47, 50–1, 53, 65,  
71, 85–8, 95–6, 117–19,  
153, 163, 169. See also voce 
chiusa 
close vowel 33, 48, 51, 56, 60, 67–9, 
76, 118–19, 155, 163 
semi-close 77 
closed quotient 72, 150, 156–7 n.1 
closing 12–13, 15, 34, 44, 49, 65, 
74–6, 84, 89, 94, 115–18, 156 
closing rate 13, 15 
mini-closing 76, 94 
vocal folds, of 12 
Co#n, Berton 73 
contact quotient 119–20, 150, 156 
convergence, convergent 33, 48, 61, 
66, 69–70, 72–4, 102 
resonator 38, 52, 66–7, 73, 99, 
118, 156, 166, 169 
vowel 144–5 
PRAA.indb   188PRAA.indb   188 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
Index 189
cover 47, 49, 62, 65, 74, 78, 84, 
115–17, 155–6 
acoustic de/f_inition 74, 115, 117 
heavy cover 84, 116, 159 
vocal folds, of 120, 161, 168 
cricothyroid muscles (CT) 51, 67, 
120–1, 139, 156, 160–1, 163, 
171 
depth 15, 32–3, 37–8, 44, 47, 54–5, 
65–9, 116, 126, 143, 156, 159 
divergence, divergent 45–6, 56, 108, 
111, 132, 157, 163, 169 
resonator 46, 108 
downstream resistor 142, 144, 157 
electroglottography (EGG) 149–50, 
157 
epilarynx, epilaryngeal 22, 36, 38, 73, 
154, 157–8, 166, 168 
Fach 30, 37, 43, 56, 65, 157 
&ow phonation 15, 48, 137, 162 
formant(s) 18, 22, 25–40 
clustering 33, 38, 44, 53, 96, 158, 
171 
/f_irst formant 18, 26, 30, 32–5, 
38, 48, 50–1, 55–6, 60–2, 
77, 94–5, 156, 158, 163, 169, 
179–80 
lowering 33, 52, 116 
raising 33–4, 44–6, 107–8, 
117, 131 
harmonic interactions with 34, 41 
n.3, 93 
locations 26, 29, 34, 46, 50, 95, 
125–6, 169, 179–80 
number of 30 
roles of 30, 32, 34 
second formant 30, 33–6, 46, 54, 
61, 94, 100, 104, 159, 169 
front vowel 35, 55, 73, 82, 104, 132, 
159 
front-back dimension 34–6, 69–70, 
159 
fronted tongue 36, 55, 95, 101, 159 
fullness 32–3, 44, 55, 63, 69, 96, 159 
fundamental frequency (fo) 6, 8, 11–18, 
37, 44, 47, 59–60, 63, 93, 96, 
153, 159, 163, 164, 170–1 
Granqvist, Svante 145, 147 
Handel, G. F . 87 
harmonic(s) 6–8, 11–18, 24–6, 28–9, 
43–5, 51, 54, 59, 70–2, 93–5, 
111, 145, 153–4, 161, 164, 
172, 174 
harmonic series 6–7 
head 47, 68, 82, 104–5, 135 
dominant 95–6, 132 
heady, headier 15, 18, 53, 96, 121, 
159–60 
mix 122 
voice 4, 49, 51, 53, 55, 119, 170–1 
heavy 117, 121 
cover 116, 159 
mechanism 119 
production 121 
Helmholtz resonator 21–2, 159 
inertance, inertive reactance 73, 142, 
160 
inhalation 
noiseless 61, 99–100 
instructional technology 1–3, 145 
intensity 5–6, 8, 12–13, 16, 20 n.1, 53, 
97, 111, 154, 160, 166–7 
interactivity 8, 24, 37–8, 72–3, 160, 
162, 166 
knowledge 
declarative 3–4, 120, 156 
procedural 3–4, 81, 104, 112, 115, 
117, 120–1, 165 
Kraus, Alfredo 116 
PRAA.indb   189PRAA.indb   189 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
 Index 190
Large, John 73 
laryngeal registration 19, 50–2, 
65, 67, 94, 122, 125, 139, 
141–4. See also chest, head; 
mechanisms zero, one, 
two, & three; cricothyroid, 
thyroarytenoid 
linear source-/f_ilter model 7, 12, 22, 
24, 109, 160 
London, George 89, 183 
loudness 20 n.4, 27, 137, 160 
Lovetri, Jeanette 110 
Madde synthesizer 2, 3, 12, 17, 30, 51, 
62, 145–7, 172–8 
mechanism, vibrational 15, 20 n.3, 
61, 119–20, 141, 146, 150, 
171 
one (M1) 15, 59, 67, 108, 110, 119, 
155–6, 160–1, 165 
three (M3) 59, 120, 160–1 
two (M2) 16, 51, 59, 67, 119, 
155–6, 160–1, 165 
zero, (M0) 161 
Miller, Donald Gray 36, 55, 73, 148, 
150–1 
mode of phonation 13–15, 17–18, 
161, 172 
breathy phonation 14, 122, 146, 
162 
&ow phonation 15, 48, 137, 146, 
162 
pressed phonation 14, 19, 46,  
56, 65–6, 103, 108, 110,  
121, 137–8, 142, 146, 157, 
162 
music 6, 91, 107 
contemporary commercial 
(CCM) 18, 29, 37, 54, 94, 
156, 158, 168, 171 
musical theater 45, 95, 107, 121–2, 
154, 168 
popular music 107, 156 
world music 45, 95, 107, 122, 154, 
157 
nasalance 144, 162 
noise 5–8, 11, 14, 18, 20 n.1, 61, 
100, 146, 159, 166. See also 
inhalation, noiseless 
non-linear source-/f_ilter model 24–5, 
72, 162 
non-linearity 24, 146 
open throat 61, 99 
open timbre 45–7, 50, 65, 82, 84, 
86–7, 89, 90, 109, 111, 117, 
119, 125–6, 128–9, 133, 153, 
163, 169. See also voce aperta 
open vowel 33, 46, 49, 51, 54, 67, 73, 
75–8, 83, 108–9, 119, 126–8, 
157, 163, 165 
opening, vowel 53, 55–6, 62, 69, 71, 
74, 78, 90, 94, 96, 106, 117, 
136 
openness-closeness dimension 32–3, 
163 
overtones 163 
partials 14–15, 22, 27, 37–8, 43, 51, 
53, 97, 104, 110–11, 120, 159, 
163, 172, 174–5 
passaggio 66, 77, 116–17, 163 
lower passaggio 51, 62, 65–79 n.1, 
81, 83, 163, 181 
primo passaggio 68, 76–7, 79 n.1, 
163 
secondo passaggio 76–9 n.1, 163 
upper passaggio 51, 65, 76–7 
zona di passaggio 68, 69, 75–7, 83, 
143, 163 
passive vowel modi/f_ication 
migration 34, 47, 50, 66, 69–71, 
76, 81–4, 86, 115, 117, 126, 
130, 145, 164, 170, 177–9 
Pavarotti, Luciano 115, 184 
PRAA.indb   190PRAA.indb   190 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
Index 191
pedagogy, pedagogic 1, 4, 9, 17, 27, 
50, 70, 81, 83, 104, 115, 118, 
121, 137, 141, 145, 147 
perception, percept 4–6, 8, 16–18, 20, 
25, 41 n.3, 78 
of frequency (pitch) 5, 6, 8, 11 
of intensity (loudness) 20, 27, 137, 
160 
of registration 120–1, 138, 141–2, 
156 
of tonal sensation 82, 103 
of turning over 62, 68, 81, 85, 156 
of vibrato 11, 137–8, 147, 149, 151 
of voice type 56, 83 
of vowel, timbre 32, 35–6, 47, 62, 
68–71, 74, 81–2 
perturbation 23, 30, 154, 158, 164 
piriform sinuses 38, 157, 164, 168 
pitch 5–8, 11, 15–17, 19–22, 26, 39, 
43–5, 47–8, 50, 54–6, 62, 67, 
96, 100, 117, 131–2, 137–9, 
143, 147, 159, 164–5, 171–3 
pitch of turning 50, 68, 84, 86, 118, 
126–7, 130, 164 
power spectrum 12, 39–40, 49, 
149–51, 164, 167 
pressed phonation. See mode of 
phonation 
pressure 
breath 14, 22, 38, 111, 138, 161 
 waveform 6, 15, 149, 159, 165 
Price, Leontyne 62, 183 
primary acoustic register 
transition 47, 49, 76, 95, 131, 165, 
176 
primary laryngeal register 165 
primary turning 75–8 
quarter-wave resonator 22–3, 27, 37, 
93, 158, 164, 166 
Rachmaninoﬀ, Sergei 84, 183 
Ravel, Maurice 85, 89, 183 
reactance 38, 43, 73, 142, 157, 160, 
166 
Real-time spectrography 147–9, 151, 
166–7 
resonance(s) 3, 7–9, 11, 16, 19, 21,  
23, 25, 27, 29–32, 39, 43–4, 
93, 99, 103, 153–4, 158, 166, 
169 
anti-resonance 157, 164, 168 
balance 35, 37–8, 73, 148–9, 155 
characteristics 7, 9, 25, 28–9, 39, 
95, 167 
/f_irst 22, 26, 30, 31, 33–4, 36, 41 
n.3, 44–56, 60, 62–3, 71–2, 
75, 94–6, 117, 122, 125, 131, 
144, 153, 169 
frequency 22, 23 
harmonic interactions 26, 34, 
43–4, 49, 55, 64, 71–2, 74–5, 
78, 93, 95, 125–6, 145–6, 
152–3, 170 
higher 23 
lower, lowest 21, 23, 32 
peaks 21, 28 
primary 27 
second 30–1, 33–6, 39, 41 n.3, 
52–5, 62, 78, 87, 153, 155, 163 
strategies 34–6, 38, 45, 49, 57 n.1, 
67, 72, 78, 116–17, 156–7, 
163 
tracking 158 
tube 28, 154 
tuning 19, 24, 31, 36, 44, 68, 134, 
158, 164 
roll-oﬀ 8, 12, 14–16, 19, 51, 145–6, 166, 
172–4 
Schubert, Franz 89–91, 184 
Schutte, Harm 148 
second formant. See formant, second 
semantics 3, 7, 121 
diﬀerences 115, 118, 122 
semi-occluded vocal tract 142, 143, 166 
PRAA.indb   191PRAA.indb   191 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
 Index 192
singer’s formant cluster (SFC) 14, 
36–8, 46, 55, 57 n.1, 65, 67, 
69, 73, 109, 144, 151, 154–5, 
157–8, 164, 167, 171 
formant tracking 44, 77, 96, 158 
formant tuning 33, 44, 69, 72, 95, 
158 
strategies 36, 54 
vowel formants 29, 31, 50, 104, 
153, 158, 169–70 
somatosense 4, 31, 82, 156, 167–8 
front-to-back 67 
locational 36, 68, 103, 105, 113, 
117, 120–1, 126, 129, 133, 
135, 161 
migration of 26, 117 
timbral 65, 68, 135 
vibrotactile 104 
sound transfer characteristics 7, 25, 
28–9, 157 
spectral envelope 39, 167 
spectral slope 8, 12–13, 15, 18–19, 
24–5, 97, 141, 159–60, 164, 
166–7 
spectrography 147–2, 166–7 
Strauss, Richard 62–4, 183 
Sundberg, Johan 36, 38, 73, 144 
thyroarytenoid muscles (TA) 15, 65, 
111, 120, 160, 168, 171 
tilt. See roll oﬀ 
Titze, Ingo 29, 36, 38, 59, 73, 120 
tools 2, 145–52 
transglottal pressure diﬀerence 14, 
19–20, 24, 95, 107–11, 121–2, 
142, 157, 160–1, 166–7 
transient theory, model 7, 24, 167 
turning, turning over 47, 49–51, 54, 
65, 70, 74, 78, 81–3, 117, 127, 
140, 155–6, 159, 165, 168, 
176. See also pitch of turning; 
primary turning 
mini- 76–7, 87, 89–90, 94, 126 
vertical phase diﬀerence 15, 59, 121, 
160–1, 168 
vocal fry 119, 161 
vocal tract 8, 9, 11, 13–14, 18–25, 
27–32, 34–5, 37–40, 43, 53, 
59, 65, 70, 93, 95, 99, 100, 
103, 108, 110–11, 148, 153–6, 
158, 161, 164, 166–71, 173–6 
/f_ilter 168–9, 171 
tube 27–31, 37, 47, 52, 54–6, 65–6, 
69–70, 74–6, 93–4, 96, 99, 
101–2, 108, 125, 154, 159, 
166, 168, 170, 179 
voce aperta 4, 45, 57 n.1, 65, 115, 153, 
163, 169 
voce chiusa 4, 47, 57 n.1, 65, 115, 153, 
155–6, 163, 169 
VoceVista 2, 148–52, 178–9 
voice 1, 2, 4, 7–9, 11–13, 15, 25, 26, 
32, 65, 94–5, 157, 179 
analysis 1, 2, 148, 151, 164, 166 
lower 59, 60, 65 
middle 34, 55, 60–1, 66, 110 
non-treble 36, 44–5, 47–51, 54, 
56, 65, 67, 69, 74–5, 78, 81, 
83–4, 96, 125–6, 129, 163, 
165 
pharyngeal 38, 61, 164 
science 1–2, 6, 27, 73, 119,  
123 n.1 
source 7–9, 11–13, 17–19, 21–2, 
24, 28–9, 43, 141, 143–4, 
154–5, 160–1, 167, 169, 172 
synthesizer 2, 145–7, 173–4 
treble 34, 37, 44, 48, 51–2, 54–5, 
57 n.1, 59–60, 62, 64 n.2, 
65, 78, 81, 83, 96, 108, 110, 
125–7, 129, 132, 135, 158, 
163, 165, 170 
type 18, 30, 37, 119, 178 (see also 
Fach) 
upper 34, 36, 47, 61, 66, 76, 132, 
163–4 (see also head, chest) 
PRAA.indb   192PRAA.indb   192 7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM7/10/2025   4:39:04 PM
Index 193
vowel(s) 102, 144 
back 22, 35, 55, 81–2 
close 33, 48, 51, 56, 60, 64, 67,  
77, 83, 117–19, 155, 159,  
169 
de/f_inition, identity 16, 17, 23, 
33–4, 60, 69–1, 74, 132, 169 
formants/resonances 26, 30–1, 40, 
55, 94, 158 
front 22, 35–6, 55, 81–2, 159 
modi/f_ication/migration 28, 32, 
34, 50, 52, 60, 62–3, 70–2, 74, 
82, 84, 115, 117, 131–2, 153, 
164, 170 
open 33, 45–6, 48–9, 51, 53–4, 56, 
77, 83, 119, 163, 169 
over-vowel 97, 108, 163, 168 
placement sensations 36, 103–5, 
161 
tone color 6, 32, 35, 71–2, 74, 104, 
137, 153 
turning 50, 67–8, 74, 77, 81, 86, 
94, 126, 130, 140, 164, 168 
under-vowel 31, 68, 71, 97, 
116–17, 126, 129, 168 
whoop 37, 44, 47–9, 51–6, 57 n.2, 
62–4, 69, 71, 76–8, 93–6, 
125–8, 131–2, 135–6, 153, 
158, 166, 170, 175–6 
yell 44–6, 54, 65, 68, 74, 82, 93, 95, 
107–9, 116–17, 122–3, 126, 
154, 158, 169–70 
coupling 65, 170 
instinct 45, 68, 74, 117, 137, 
139–40 
timbre 45–6, 54, 95, 107 
PRAA.indb   193PRAA.indb   193 7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM
PRAA.indb   194PRAA.indb   194 7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM
PRAA.indb   195PRAA.indb   195 7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM
PRAA.indb   196PRAA.indb   196 7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM
PRAA.indb   197PRAA.indb   197 7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM
PRAA.indb   198PRAA.indb   198 7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM7/10/2025   4:39:05 PM
