
3
The Voice Source
!e complex waveform excited in the air column of the vocal tract 
by the oscillation of the vocal folds is called the voice source. In non-
noisy styles of singing, 1 it can be deconstructed as a subset of harmonic 
frequencies of the fundamental frequency of that oscillation. !at set 
of frequencies arises from a combination of the way in which each 
oscillation of the vibrator (the vocal folds) is simultaneously modulated 
from a tracheal airstream into resonance-shaped impulses, which are 
/f_iltered further by the ongoing periodicity of vocal fold oscillations. Only 
those frequencies that initially align with vocal tract resonances and are 
also in sync with the ongoing, reiterated vocal fold periodicity survive. 
Harmonic frequencies can only arise from the fundamental frequency 
of the pitch being sung (assigned by the composer or improvised by the 
performer), with all harmonics being limited to whole integer multiples 
of the fundamental frequency or /f_irst harmonic of that assigned pitch. In 
the typically vibrant tone of Western classical singing, these frequencies 
also oscillate regularly above and below the target frequency set (the 
intended pitch) at a rate of approximately six times per second, creating 
the phenomenon of vocal vibrato. !ere may also be some noise element, 
but the better or “cleaner” the phonation, the higher the harmonic 
to noise ratio —that is, the less aperiodic noise there will be. In an 
excellent tone in the classical aesthetic, there is no perceivable noise; 
in other words, no non-harmonic frequency components of signi/f_icant 
intensity. If such a glottic oscillation could be isolated from the vocal 
tract and introduced into open space—as in a lip brr—a complete set 
of harmonics would occur with a “ roll-oﬀ” or weakening in power the 
higher they are above the /f_irst harmonic (the fundamental frequency) 
at a rate that is aﬀected by several variables, but ideally at about 12 
PRAA.indb   11PRAA.indb   11 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  12
The Voice Source
decibels (dBs) per octave. !e resultant pattern of intensity reduction 
per frequency is called its spectral slope . (Figure 3.1 ) An unresonated, 
pitched “laryngeal buzz” (as might be generated by an excised larynx) is 
surprisingly unattractive (see Madde exploration 1).
Madde Exploration 1: /T_he Unresonated Voice Source
(See Appendix 1, p. 172)
The Origin of Harmonics
A legitimate question arises concerning the physical origin of harmonics 
in voice, a key component of the source-/f_ilter model. Unlike stringed 
instruments, whose string lengths approximately subdivide and oscillate 
at many nearly harmonic frequencies, the glottal opening/closing event 
only oscillates at a fundamental frequency. !is modulates the rate of 
escaping air&ow in such a way as to create pressure variations, converting 
direct current (DC) &ow into an alternating current (AC) form of acoustic 
pressure waves, consisting of air pressure compressions and rarefactions. If 
Figure 3.1 Power spectrum of the voice source with a spectral slope or 
roll-off of ca. 12 dB’s/octave. A power spectrum displays power on the 
vertical and frequency on the horizontal.
PRAA.indb   12PRAA.indb   12 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
 The Voice Source 13
the glottis didn’t actually close, but merely modulated &ow symmetrically, 
that is, sinusoidally, we would only have a single fundamental frequency, 
since such a sinusoidal variation in air&ow would cause sinusoidal air 
pressure variations. With vocal fold closure, however, the &ow, and the rate 
of change of &ow become rather complex and asymmetrical, with a gradual 
increase in &ow at glottal opening, to a brief moment of peak &ow, followed 
by an increasingly steep, abrupt declination of &ow into glottal closure. !at 
sharp declination in &ow, plus the absence of &ow at glottal closure, cause 
a sudden pressure rarefaction, a kind of abrupt “jerking back, ” creating the 
strongest part of the acoustic signal. !is asymmetry, called the maximum 
/f_low declination rate, rapidly accelerates through the theoretical closing 
rates of all higher frequencies, resulting in the excitation of that sweep of 
frequencies that are compatible with the preferential frequency response 
of the vocal tract. As those favored frequencies oscillate back and forth, 
some of them that are in consonant sync with the next glottal closure event 
will be subsequently and repeatedly re-energized, as o/f_ten as their return 
oscillation aligns with the next fundamental glottal closure. !e /f_irst 
harmonic aligns and might receive an appropriately timed strengthening 
rarefaction “pull” on each return. A potential second harmonic would get 
an encouraging pull every second return swing, the third harmonic every 
third return swing, and so on. Being less frequently re-energized per return 
swing results in a weakening of successively higher harmonics, resulting in 
a spectral slope. !e returning swings of frequencies that are not multiples 
of the fundamental arrive at the glottis at an inopportune moment within 
their respective cycles and are suppressed, receiving an eﬀect contrary to 
and at odds with their phase. As mentioned above, impulse frequencies 
were previously enhanced or de-enhanced by the response of vocal tract 
resonances, a topic we will explore in the following chapters.
Voice Source Harmonic 
Characteristics
!e potential number and intensity of harmonics from the voice source 
that are available for resonation are primarily determined by four factors: 
mode of phonation, laryngeal register, intensity, and fundamental 
frequency.
PRAA.indb   13PRAA.indb   13 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  14
Mode of Phonation
!e mode of phonation has to do with the relationship of three factors: 
transglottal air pressure diﬀerence, air&ow, and glottal (valve) resistance. 
Of these, the amount of breath pressure (via torso compression and 
resultant lung volume reduction) and the degree and type of glottal 
adductive resistance are the active, causal, controlling factors, with the 
amount of air&ow being the mediated result. Air &ows from areas of 
higher pressure to areas of lower pressure. Tracheal air pressure (below the 
glottis) is raised to be above the average pressure in the vocal tract (above 
the glottis). !is is referred to as the transglottal pressure diﬀerence . 
!at pressure diﬀerence is casually referred to simply as “breath pressure. ” 
Since transglottal pressure diﬀerence determines the amount of glottal 
resistance necessary to achieve competent vocal fold closure, and since 
the level of glottal resistance determines the collision force of the vibrating 
tissues, having an appropriately low transglottal pressure diﬀerence is 
essential to vocal fold health. A high transglottal pressure diﬀerence and 
collision force, over time, can result in tissue irritation and pathology. 
We will learn that favorable acoustic tunings of the vocal tract can raise 
the eﬀective “back pressure” in the vocal tract to reduce the transglottal 
pressure diﬀerence to comfortable, sustainable levels, even when higher 
subglottic pressure is needed for powerful phonations.
!ese three factors can be modeled in a phonation equation:2 Breath 
pressure/air&ow = glottal resistance. While there are many possible ratios 
between these factors, they can either be in balance, or imbalanced in one 
of two ways: too much air&ow or too much glottal resistance.
 z Pressed phonation (a phonation with excessive glottal resistance 
and insu#cient air&ow) has a moderately strong fundamental 
frequency or /f_irst harmonic (1fo), a shallower (less steep) spectral 
slope with a more gradual roll-oﬀ in power, and thus relatively more 
and stronger high harmonics. It is therefore less warm and more 
metallic, brassy, or overly bright in timbre. Ex.: 1/.5 = 2
 z Breathy phonation (a phonation with excess air&ow and insu#cient 
glottal resistance) has a moderate to strong 1 fo, but a steep spectral 
slope roll-oﬀ in power, and therefore fewer and weaker high partials, 
and o/f_ten some air turbulence noise element. It is therefore airy, 
&uty, and sometimes noisy in timbre. Ex.: 1/2 = .5
PRAA.indb   14PRAA.indb   14 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
 The Voice Source 15
 z Fllow phonation has a strong 1fo, a moderate spectral slope roll-oﬀ  
(about 12 decibels per octave) and a relatively ample number of high 
harmonics. It is therefore balanced in timbre. Ex.: 1/1 = 1
A strong fundamental frequency requires that the amplitude of glottal 
opening be su#cient in each oscillatory cycle. Strong upper partials 
require complete glottal closure with a rapid closing rate, that is, an 
abrupt &ow declination rate. Such a generous opening and abrupt closure 
occurs in balanced &ow phonation, especially if initiated with pleasurable 
expression from gentle but complete glottal closure (a well-executed coup 
de glotte) immediately prior to phonation.
Laryngeal Register
Laryngeal register refers to the muscular adjustment of the vocal folds 
for pitch regulation. !is is primarily controlled by the thyroarytenoids 
(TA), the vocal fold shortening, thickening muscles that make up the 
deeper body of the vocal folds, and the cricothyroids (CT), the vocal 
fold-stretching, thinning muscles that lie partly outside of the larynx. 
!e muscles that close the vocal folds (interarytenoids and lateral 
cricoarytenoids) also play a role. Shorter, thicker, looser folds include 
the TA muscles in the oscillation, vibrate at lower frequencies, and are 
“chestier” in laryngeal register, while longer, tauter, thinner folds shi/f_t  
to vocal ligament  oscillations, vibrate at higher frequencies, and are 
“headier” in laryngeal register. (See Laryngeal Registration Revisited,  
p. 141, for more detail and for training suggestions.)
 z Chestier (shorter, thicker) laryngeal adjustments have a vertical 
phase diﬀerence  (a greater depth of vocal fold contact, with an 
undulatory motion from lower to upper vocal fold margins in 
each cycle) creating a more complex pressure waveform with a 
shallower (less steep) spectral slope, more, stronger high harmonics, 
and greater auditory roughness (buzziness). !ey are therefore 
inherently brassier in timbre. !is thicker vocal fold shape is 
increasingly referred to as vibrational mechanism one (M1).3
 z Headier (longer, thinner) laryngeal adjustments “chop” the airstream 
more simply (little to no vertical phase diﬀerence) and less abruptly, 
creating a more sinusoidal pressure wave pattern with a strong 1 fo, 
but fewer, weaker high harmonics, a steeper spectral slope and 
PRAA.indb   15PRAA.indb   15 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  16
minimal auditory roughness. !ey are therefore smoother, &utier 
in timbre. !is thinner vocal fold shape is referred to as vibrational 
mechanism two (M2).
Intensity4
 z Louder phonations usually have more and stronger high harmonics.
 z Quieter phonations have a steeper roll-oﬀ, with fewer and weaker 
high harmonics.
Fundamental Frequency (1fo)
 z !e approximate equivalent of the pitch percept5
 z A lower 1fo (lower pitch) has both more, and more “closely spaced” 
harmonics within primary audibility range. For example, a baritone 
singing C3, an octave below middle C, will have as many as thirty-
two potential harmonics within the range of the keyboard.
 z A higher 1 fo (higher pitch) has fewer, more “widely spaced” 
harmonics relative to vocal tract resonances. A soprano singing a 
“high C” (C6) will only have four harmonics within the range of the 
keyboard.
 z !e number of harmonics within primary, timbrally signi/f_icant 
audible range (roughly within the keyboard or below ca. 4200 Hz) 
has major implications for vocal resonance, resonance management 
strategy, as well as for vowel de/f_inition, diﬀerentiation, and 
intelligibility (Figure 3.2).
Figure 3.2  Absolute spectral tone color per frequency (adapted from 
Howell with permission).
PRAA.indb   16PRAA.indb   16 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
 The Voice Source 17
Madde Exploration 2: /T_he Eﬀect of Mode of Phonation and Range on 
Potential Voice Source Harmonics
Absolute Spectral Tone Color
Research from the /f_ield of psychoacoustics—how the brain processes 
sound—has recently been brought into voice pedagogy by Ian Howell 
(Howell 2016, 2025). Psychoacoustics observes that, like human eyes 
and brains process light frequencies as colors, our ears and brains 
process sound frequencies as lower or higher, on a darkness to brightness 
continuum, and as vowel-like tone colors. Frequencies below C5 are 
low, dark, and [~u]-like in spectral tone color. Frequencies above C7 are 
high, bright and [~i]-like in spectral tone color. Frequencies between C5 
and C7 are intermediate in brightness and spectral tone color. ( Figure 
3.2) A frequency or su#ciently narrow spectral band from any sound 
source will share an absolute spectral tone color to the same individual 
auditor’s perception. !is understanding is proving to be transformative in 
understanding with predictive speci/f_icity the mechanisms of timbre, vowel 
formation, migration, and modi/f_ication across range and vocal register.
Necessary Roughness
A second observation from the psychoacoustic work of Howell is 
the percept of necessary roughness . As mentioned above, pitch is 
logarithmic, with increasingly smaller intervals between increasingly 
higher harmonics. !e /f_irst /f_ive voice source harmonics are well spaced and 
reinforce a pure, smooth percept of the pitch or fundamental frequency. 
Beginning with harmonic six (6 fo), we have adjacent harmonics that are 
a minor third or less apart. Harmonics in close proximity introduce a 
beating “roughness” to human perception; the closer together, the 
rougher the percept. Harmonics above the eighth harmonic not only 
introduce an even stronger roughness factor but also achieve perceptual 
independence from the fundamental frequency or sense of pitch, existing 
PRAA.indb   17PRAA.indb   17 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  18
as a buzzy or ringing quality alongside the pitch percept. Nota bene:  
psychoacoustic roughness is a buzzing or sizzling quality generated by 
closely clustered, harmonic (periodic) frequencies, and is not the same 
as aperiodic roughness caused by asymmetrical vocal fold vibration, 
false vocal fold vibration, the deliberate distortion used in some vocal 
genres, or noises induced by vocal fold pathology. Competent vocal fold 
closure results in a longer closed phase in each vibratory cycle, generating 
higher, more closely clustered harmonics and an increase in roughness 
percept. All of the factors cited above that aﬀect the number and strength 
of harmonics—mode of phonation, laryngeal register, intensity, and 
fundamental frequency—also aﬀect the amount and quality of timbral 
roughness. Auditory roughness is a “necessary” correlate to competent 
vocal fold closure for much of the range. Being perceptually associated 
with laryngeal registers—buzzier seeming “chestier” and smoother 
seeming “headier”—auditory roughness migrates across range, register, 
and voice type from buzzier low tones to smoother high tones.
Spectral Slope Contribution
!e main contribution of the glottal valve to the perception of timbre is 
via spectral slope, since spectral slope determines both relative brightness 
and auditory roughness. It also contributes to the strength of the more 
o/f_ten, vowel-identifying second formant contribution. A steep spectral 
slope will seem warmer, rounder, smoother, and therefore “headier, ” 
and will feature more of the lower, warmer, /f_irst formant tone color 
contribution. A shallow spectral slope will seem brassier, rougher, and 
therefore “chestier, ” and feature more of the second and higher formant 
tone color contributions.
Take-Away Message for Harmonics
!e voice source’s /f_ilter-shaped spectral content comprises the essential 
raw material from which the radiated complex waveform is constructed. 
!e resonator (vocal tract) does not make sound; it shapes and reinforces, 
PRAA.indb   18PRAA.indb   18 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
 The Voice Source 19
or not, acoustic energy introduced into it via the excitation of abrupt 
glottal closure. !erefore, the singer needs a su#ciently robust waveform 
with enough spectral content, freely gotten, appropriate in balance and 
roll-oﬀ for the pitch, dynamic, and aﬀect they are given to perform. 
!is healthy voice source is dependent upon the establishment of &ow 
phonation, usually through clean, complete, /f_irm but gentle glottal closure, 
an eﬀective, responsive breath/voice connection and coordination, 
appropriate laryngeal registration for the situation, and a smooth, gradual 
steepening of spectral slope with pitch ascent.
Breath management and even laryngeal registration are topics that will 
not be covered to any great extent in this text. Nonetheless, eﬀective 
coordination of breath with phonation, as well as an ability to make the 
laryngeal adjustments in vocal fold shape necessary for all pitches of the 
range, are requisite, foundational factors in establishing optimal resonance. 
We will later learn that idealized resonator adjustments can signi/f_icantly 
assist both breath management and vocal fold vibration. Vocal tract 
resonance can interact with the glottal valve in such a way that glottal 
closure is lengthened without resorting to the excess glottal resistance of 
pressed phonation. In other words, skillful resonance tuning can eﬀectively 
raise the pressure of air in the vocal tract to keep the transglottal pressure 
diﬀerence comfortably low.
Roles of the Glottal Valve
!e vocal folds have two primary jobs in phonation: glottal resistance—
the amount of closure strength (glottal competence) needed to manage the 
transglottal pressure diﬀerence and resultant air&ow from the trachea—and 
shaping for pitch—adjusting their length, mass, thickness/thinness, and 
stiﬀness in order to create all of the pitches of the singer’s range. !e more 
eﬀort they expend for the former (pressure resistance), the less &exibility 
and capability they will have for the latter (pitch shaping), limiting range 
and ease of function. Transglottal pressure diﬀerence determines both the 
degree of glottal resistance required for competent glottal closure as well 
as the impact force of the colliding vocal fold tissues. !erefore, /f_inding 
an appropriate balance of pressure, &ow, and resistance is essential not 
only to e#ciency and range but also to vocal health. Fortunately, skillful 
PRAA.indb   19PRAA.indb   19 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics  20
acoustic tuning of the vocal tract can raise the air pressure above the 
glottis to counterbalance the higher tracheal (subglottic) pressures needed 
for powerful phonations, eﬀectively reducing the transglottal pressure 
diﬀerence.
Notes
1 !e tonal ideal of Western classical singing pursues perceptually “pure” 
tones—at least in its vowels. Noise involves the presence of non-harmonic 
frequencies in a sound. Some vocal styles and many consonants include 
noise elements as a part of the sound palette.
2 !e numbers used in the phonation equation are not actual 
measurements of pressure, &ow, and resistance, rather they are symbolic 
of values, with the number 1 modeling an ideal amount of each for 
any given situation. Of course, actual values will vary necessarily by 
circumstance (a dramatic tenor loud C5 versus a countertenor mezzo 
forte C5, for example), but an ideal balance as well as various imbalances 
can be conceived and modeled for each circumstance. Such modeling 
is useful for considering the nature of an imbalance and for devising 
corrective strategies.
3 Vibrational mechanism refers to a characteristic of vocal fold shape 
and vibratory pattern that is not only the result of the degree of muscle 
participation by the various laryngeal muscles that shape the vocal folds, 
but is also aﬀected by aerodynamic and acoustic factors that can trigger a 
“toggling” from one vibrational mechanism to another.
4 Intensity is the physical property for which loudness is the percept. While 
the terms are not synonymous (as with frequency and pitch: see note 5 
below), for most practical pedagogic purposes, we needn’t be concerned 
with the distinction.
5 Frequency and pitch are not synonymous terms, since pitch is our 
perception of a sound pressure pattern o/f_ten comprised of multiple 
frequencies, and can be “&atted” or “sharped” from the actual 
fundamental frequency by resonance factors. However, for most practical 
purposes, singing teachers needn’t worry about this distinction.
PRAA.indb   20PRAA.indb   20 7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM7/10/2025   4:38:48 PM
Practical Vocal Acoustics